# The Dental Marketing Manual

# 2022 FULL COLOR EDITION

The Comprehensive Guide to Marketing for Your Dental Practice

# Dental Success Network

Addison Killeen, DDS

Ryan Gross

Kristin Carroll
---
# Dental Office Marketing Manual

by Addison Killeen, DDS, Ryan Gross and Kristin Carroll

ISBN 9798417372438

1 Dentistry Practice Management

2 Business & Economics

Cover Design by Kristin Carroll of MyCMOShare

2022 Paperback

2020, 2021, 2022 Addison Killeen DDS, Ryan Gross, Kristin Carroll

All Rights Reserved.

Published in the United States by KDP Publishing platform, an imprint of Amazon:

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Killeen, Addison, Gross, Ryan, Carroll; Kristin
---
# Dental Success Network

# THE ULTIMATE GUIDES TO DENTAL SUCCESS!

# DENTAL OFFICE OPERATIONS MANUAL

The resources found in The Dental Office Operations Manual are the ultimate guide to creating your own in-office operations manual. We know how important it is to take time to create internal resources with a high level of detail. This level of detail will guide your team, organize your office and help to create that stress-free practice you're striving for.

# THE ASSOCIATE MANUAL

Many dentists are getting to the point of burnout because their practice is growing and patients love their personalized care. However, at a certain point, they cannot do any more dentistry. When this problem occurs, the most common answer is to grow the business and hire an associate. Unfortunately, most dentists do not plan or execute this idea well at all. This leaves the owner frustrated and the associate in a bad spot after a few months. This book is the answer to help avoid those problems, keep the owner of the practice happy, and give systems to help develop the associate into an amazing clinician and member of the team.

# DENTAL STARTUP MANUAL

In this guide, they teach and guide you through the journey from initial idea through first patients - plus saving you more than $50,000 in the process. With downloadable documents to match throughout the process, this guide will attack the major parts of the process including financing, site selection, floor plan design, construction, equipment selection, cabinetry, technology, marketing, systemization, and cash flow control.

# DENTAL OFFICE ACQUISITION MANUAL

This 339-page instructional manual covers everything you could need in buying a dental practice: From scouting locations for possible acquisitions all the way through the challenges that may arise as you take ownership and work with a new team. This is the book we wished we had as we ran the gamut of acquiring offices.

Order your bundle today at: DentalSuccessNetwork.com/manuals
---
# Acknowledgements

This book would not have happened except for the wonderful contribution of a few experts in their respective fields. Mary Lafferty is the queen of Search Engine Optimization; and her wisdom with branding and decision-funnels were invaluable to so many areas of the book; we cannot even point them out. Courtney Harder was also a workhorse in helping to make sure we explained Google's Search algorithms correctly: She was a tireless contributor in making sure that the intricate algorithms can be explained in layman's terms. The Google Ads and Facebook sections were immensely aided by the expert direction of Eric Lott. Eric has many years of experience in the Google Ads field and we are glad that he gave his wisdom to this project: The book's good looks were primarily due to the tireless work of Bryce Reichardt, done after hours and on weekends. We appreciated his input and direction to make sure the images were perfect and conveyed the messages we were trying to get across. We are blessed to have these important team members at CMOShare, because working with the best and brightest makes coming to the office feel like anything but work.

Ashlee Hirschfeld and Nicole Novakowski were invaluable during the editing stages of the work, helping to make sure ideas were well thought-out and making sure that even non-dental types could understand the points we were trying to make. We appreciate their work during early mornings and late nights helping to make this book a much better educational resource, as well as the entire Dental Success Manual series. In addition, this book would not be a reality without the formatting and publishing skills of Ms. Novakowski, who is both an amazing chairside dental team member and emerging book editor.

The final thanks goes to Mikaylah Lange, the researcher and book assistant for this project. While it took over a year to put this book together; Mikaylah was tireless in her dedication to keeping us authors on track and always with a positive smile. Whether she ends up as a dentist or published author is still to be seen but her research, grit, and smarts will lead her to amazing places.
---
# Table of Contents

# Introduction

# 1. Before you Begin Marketing

13

# 2. Branding

25

# 3. Online Market Presence and SEO

53

# 4. Search Engine Optimization

79

# 5. Online Paid Marketing

101

# 6. Social Media

121

# 7. Internal Marketing

131

# 8. External Marketing

171

# 9. Funnels

189

# 10. Return on Investment and Analytics

195

# 11. Kickstart your Marketing Department

209

# 12. Stories of Success

213

# 13. Dr. Killeen's Weekly Scorecard

223
---
# About your Authors

Addison Killeen, DDS, is a practicing dentist, author, speaker, and business coach. He has owned 8 practices and currently owns one startup in Lincoln, Nebraska that is growing at a logarithmic scale. Prior to the dental field, he was a 'numbers guy' for a large conglomerate, where he learned that you need to keep watching the numbers, no matter how big or small the company. He has traveled the world extensively to provide dental care to the poor and under-served. He is also the Co-Founder of the Dental Success Network, a private Dentist-Only software that provides coaching, Continuing Education, team training, and vendor/supply savings.

Ryan Gross has 12+ years of marketing, brand management, communications, and sales experience working with The Walt Disney Company, dental practices, and the attraction industry. His proven techniques have increased revenue through marketing and communication strategies. He has managed multiple million dollar budgets and helped dental practices increase new patient acquisition and patient retention. He is a faculty member of the Dental Success Network and marketing consultant for the Dental Success Institute and Mastermind Group. He is the Founder and CEO of myCMOshare, a fractional marketing service for dentists that is driven by data.

Kristin Carroll has 10 years of experience in brand design, marketing, and social media strategy. She has managed brands for multi-million dollar organizations, including a six-location dental practice, oral surgeon, and the attractions industry. In her career, she has successfully launched brands for new companies and business lines as well as completed rebranding projects for multiple dental practices. She believes in a clean, consistent design approach that stands apart from the competition. Her design and social media projects have been featured on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Time Magazine, Buzzfeed, CNN, and Larry the Cable Guy's Git-R-Done Foundation.
---
# Digital Downloads

As you go through this book; you will find lots of places where we have a document or spreadsheet that can be downloaded. In these places, click the QR code, sign up for a Free Trial, and then the second QR code takes you to the link to download all the documents and resources that are paired with this book. The last QR code is a link to all marketing examples that have been created by CMOshare.

# Free Trial of Dental Success Network

To get a FREE 45-day trial and receive digital versions of these documents in the book, visit: WWW.dentalsuccessnetwork.com/marketing-manual-application or Scan the QR Code ->

# Link to documents for DSN Members

Once you begin your free trial, all the documents are then available at this link: scan the QR Code or visit: WWW.dentalsuccessnetwork.com/marketing_vault.

# Examples of all Marketing Materials

There are tons of examples of marketing materials in the book; for downloads and visuals of all these examples, scan the QR Code or visit: WWW.mycmoshare.com/marketing-manual-supplemental or Scan the QR Code ->
---
# WORK WITH THE CO-AUTHORS

# RYAN GROSS

Marketing Expert & CMOShare Founder

# KRISTIN CARROLL

CMOShare Chief Operations Officer

# LET THE DATA DECIDE YOUR MARKETING PATH:

Your dental practice growth should correlate to every marketing dollar spent.

|Maximize|Accelerate|Integrate Marketing|Increase|
|---|---|---|---|
|ROI|Growth|Sales|New Patients|

Understanding exactly how conversions translate to revenue is key to maximizing your ROI. That's why our approach focuses on this formula.

# Analysis

We provide a complete analysis of your current operation and marketing efforts, tailored to your practice objectives whether that's acquiring a set number of new patients, improving operational efficiency, or reducing overall costs.

# Recommendations

You receive our recommendations that are customized to your practice's goals and market landscape competition, and marketing strategy:

# Take Action

You decide the next steps for your practice. We're here to help. Our team has a variety of experts to help execute marketing and branding strategy, website usability, digital content, digital advertising, and operations.

# Education

We explain all our findings to help you fully understand how your practice is performing, areas of improvement; and ultimately, how to get the most out of your investment:

Schedule your consultation today at: MyCMOShare.com
---
# Introduction

From Mr: Ryan Gross:

As a 20 year old college student from the University of Nebraska, accepted a position with the Walt Disney Company: My role was working at the Imagination! Pavilion and The Living Seas, now called The Seas with Nemo & Friends. Quite honestly, working with Disney and learning their marketing was the number one reason that attracted me there. Disney is a world-renowned park attended by millions of guests each year; and wanted insight on the marketing strategy behind this magical world:

On my first day; quickly realized how important a college kid from Nebraska was to their operations. In fact; realized how important every person who put on their Disney name tag and interacted with guests was. That was known by Disney and their leadership. To my surprise, all of us interns were ushered into a theater where Lee Cockerell, former president of Walt Disney World, was speaking: He said each day he would review compliments and complaints from guests. The number one compliment and complaint wasn't about a ride, restaurant or shopping: They were nearly always about a Cast Member (the term Disney calls employees): This is when realized how critical operations are to Disney's marketing strategy:

Disney markets memories. Families, friends and groups of people smiling, laughing, crying and more while visiting one of the many theme parks and resorts. In order for those emotions to be captured in a memory, operations must be clearly defined and tactfully consistently executed. This is a critical connection between telling a story in marketing and how operations must live up to that story:

The marketing teams at Disney look deeply into the operation's numbers when making decisions. What events are occurring, what capacity is available at the resorts, what new attractions are opening and other operational indicators are all taken into account: This allows them to market what is needed and what can be executed, not just market for the purpose of marketing:

When started my journey into dental marketing, I instantly realized the connection of operations and marketing from Disney and how it correlates with the dental industry: Disney uses data to make decisions that directly impact their marketing Return-on-Investment (ROI); something equally important in dental marketing:
---
For years, dental practices have looked at marketing through a traditional approach: This included a website, social media, traditional advertising and a logo/brand. Oftentimes, doctors look at these marketing tools and simply distribute funds to each: However; these items are only a piece of a successful dental marketing strategy: When looking at a total marketing strategy, practice owners must examine their operations, capacity, staffing and future growth. This allows marketing to work hand in hand with the practice operations and optimize for the highest ROI.

Remember; the most successful practices focus on ROI and a marketing analytics process that allows them to create the highest ROI: The focus should be on determining the ROI of each marketing tactic and measuring the impact of each campaign: Then optimize your marketing efforts based on what is working and what is not working for your practice. You should look for a positive ROI, but also measure the volume of new patients and increased revenue for your practice to sync with your long-term goals.

You or your marketing company should track every marketing campaign at a very deep level to analyze the results and determine where you will get the most bang for your buck: Your marketing company or internal team should be able to oversee all aspects of marketing from traditional media, online advertising, public relations, direct mail, social media, SEO, email marketing and more, while examining your practice operation needs.

This manual is a playbook for dental practices that pulls from the best companies outside of the dental industry, data driven marketing strategies, and real examples that empower dental practice owners to get the most out of their marketing ROI: hope you enjoy it and it changes the trajectory of your practice as you use its contents:

Ryan Gross, CMO
---
From Dr. Addison Killeen:

Some days feel like hit the jackpot with my newest startup. We started like all start-ups do, with empty schedules, stress of financial accounts near zero, and hiring just a couple team members on a bare-bones budget: While it has now been almost 3 years since those days, it seems like yesterday that was standing in 'morning huddle' encouraging the 3 team members to rally to hit $45,000 production for the month:

Fast forward 30 months, and now we are averaging $285,000 production every month. We have a team of 3 doctors, 17 team members working in 6 operatories, and only work 40 hours a week. As I write this, our doctor time is booked out for 3 weeks and we are expanding the facility to include 16 operatories. For many dentists, myself included, this is a dream come true. I enjoy being able to work alongside some of the best people I know; have fun every day with an energetic team around me, and run a practice at double-BlackBelt status each month. (Remember; double black-belt status is lower than 45% overhead.)

While there has to be a good amount of luck to be able to grow a clinic to this size in such a short period of time, I go back to a quote by Bruce Springsteen, "When it comes to luck- you make your own." Much of the success over the past two and a half years has been due to the systemization of the practice, our amazing team, and our doctors who focus an intense amount on good patient experience. However; if there was one thing that played a part above all others, it was our marketing:

I wish I could say that our marketing was easy, all of it worked, and each piece has had amazing success. However; that's not the case. Some of it worked well, some did not but in each case we took what we learned and leveraged it to better success in the next strategy: In this book, we will go through the playbook of the entire strategic plan that turned my startup into a $3.2M behemoth in a short period of time.

Some parts of this book might get technical: However; we feel that all of this information is necessary to make sure that you, as the dentist, are capable of either executing this on your own, or knowing enough to hold those around you accountable to execute it correctly: Many dentists get fooled into paying high-priced marketing companies for services that are extremely simple, or copy-and-paste jobs from other dentists. We hope that you can avoid these issues and not get caught into a situation where you are paying for services that are not a good value for your practice.

We hope this book gives you all the tools you need to make your practice the best it can be, with the patients you love to work with: If it has worked for you, I'd love to hear your success stories. Shoot me an email on my website WWW.addisonkilleen.com.

Addison Killeen, DDS
---
12
---
# Chapter 1

# Before you Begin Marketing

# What is Marketing?

Marketing has been around since the dawn of time. While they didn't have a name for it during prehistoric times, this idea has played a part in the propagation of all species as part of the chain of life. In the past it might have been called "sex appeal" but today we call it "marketing" and it's a multi-billion dollar a year industry that is getting closer to psycho-analysis rather than choosing colors and fonts.

This book is meant to be a complete summary of all things 'dental' marketing: Dental marketing is not all that different from any other sort of marketing: However; there are certain strategies and tactics that will help you more in dental marketing than if you were trying to sell mattresses or soda pop. This book will discuss the many lanes of marketing and then focus on the tactics that work especially well for dentists.

To begin, the term 'marketing' is not the same as 'advertising'. Not all marketing is advertising: And the word advertising needs to be used lightly; due to the fact that it is a very niche word. Advertising is mostly used to describe external tools like radio, newspaper and postcards. It is a very narrow definition of activities in our opinion. However; marketing is generally defined as:

marketing /'markadiNGI

noun

1. the action or business of promoting and selling products or services, including market research and advertising:

The definition does not talk about new patients, and it does not talk about collections percentage versus production percentage. It references promoting and selling something:
---
Interestingly enough, marketing in recent times has become intertwined with market research and all the iterations of high-tech decision-making research.

# History of Marketing

To understand how to execute good dental marketing; let's start by going back in time. The 1950s were generally referred to as the 'Industrial Age', distinguished by a surge in manufacturing and the majority of families living near median income. While consumerism was starting to flourish; it was still held back by the limited mindset of the 1940s. In the medical and dental fields, there was absolutely no marketing and it was thought to be inappropriate and unethical to market:

The 1950s marked a time when hospitals in most communities operated as monopolies, facing little to no competition. It was during this time that the American Medical Association dropped historically-tight restrictions on many models of marketing:

In the 1960s, the nation began to undergo an awakening of sorts to general health, including oral health. Companies sprouted up touting all sorts of toothpastes and mouthwashes, many of whom went bankrupt a few years later; only to be replaced by the large name brands owned by Johnson & Johnson or Procter & Gamble.

As hospitals started to see the profitable side of healthcare in the 1970s, they started to spend more money on marketing: There was even a marketing conference started by the American Hospital Association, after which hospitals started to realize their dependency on local doctors. It was this realization that led to hospitals initiating physician relation programs along with television commercials and billboards to attract new patients:

In a story made famous in the book Breadcrumbs to Cheesecake: A Struggling Inner-City Neighborhood Sanitarium's Journey to Become Louisiana's Largest Medical Center; author James Elrod tells the story about how the Shreveport, Louisiana hospital system grew and avoided bankruptcy: According to an article about the success of the Willis-Knighton Health System, the article states:

"Willis-Knighton Health System's use of billboards is extensive and historic. Known for adopting innovations emerging outside of the healthcare industry for deployment within it, in the 1970s, Willis-Knighton Health System became the first hospital in Louisiana to make use of billboards to market healthcare services:

According to the book; the hospital system was on the brink of 'undeclared bankruptcy'. As a new administrator came in, new processes were put in place to grow the hospital network. As things started to change, the lead administrator "made changes that would push the hospital to greater prominence, transforming it to a regional medical center:" Included in the book are what Elrod terms "25 game-changing strategies". Among these were decisions to establish the state's
---
first satellite hospital and develop a robust physician network: Marketing efforts further expanded during the 1980s with hospitals not only reaching out to physicians but marketing directly to patients. Hospitals spent nearly $50 Million on advertising in 1983, and by 1989 the spending on marketing rose to $500 Million. However, due to other market forces, many hospitals were still financially unstable and lost many billions of dollars collectively: Patient satisfaction surveys became mainstay during this time, and marketing strategies emerged according to patient feedback: Patient satisfaction was further promoted through messaging and campaign strategies.

As patients became more educated, marketing research started to become a hotter topic in marketing circles. Marketing research and analytics were a large focus in the 1990s especially aided by the invention of the internet and all the fruits that innovation brought: The rise of focus groups, message boards, and computer-aided web interviews all made connecting with patients and acquiring data more feasible.

As hospitals and medical centers started to consolidate, the administrators who ran these multi-million dollar operations were keenly aware of the role that marketing played in their fields. The dental industry quickly followed suit as dentists realized the potential within their clinics as well.

Fast forward to today, and marketing is now considered an essential function for many medical and dental facilities. As US healthcare costs account for approximately 18% of gross domestic product; hospitals, dental offices, and other medical clinics now have a large incentive to market themselves to get a larger piece of that pie. According to the most recent data available, this percentage has only grown: In fact, in 2019 alone, healthcare spending grew 4.6%, reaching $3.8 trillion a year; or $11,582 per person.

With that history in mind, we know that even more development will take place in the next few years that will impact how dentists need to market to their communities. This may include transitioning marketing efforts to Pinterest, Twitter, Snapchat, and other digital platforms. Or it might include more internal marketing techniques to capitalize on the patients you already have. This guide will help demonstrate a variety of carefully designed methods for reaching the nearby potential new patients, gaining those patients, and increasing the profitability of your practice with current patients.

# Medical Marketing versus General Marketing

Marketing for general products or services follows the laws of supply and demand: As demand for a certain product goes up, the price follows and the product becomes more expensive. As demand falls, the price falls according to a mathematical formula. This of course, is allowing for the fact that consumers cannot make a substitution for another product; in which case an increasing price might make consumers jump to another brand or type of product.
---
If you're interested in how some companies rise or fall because of substituting products, check out the book by Harvard business professor Clayton Christiansen called The Innovator's Dilemma. The book discusses the philosophy called disruptive innovation and explains how non-conforming products can enter a sector to kill off the bedrock companies that formed that sector. One example shows why Apple's iPhone, while not technically an MP3 or camera, managed to kill off both the MP3 and digital camera sectors.

The medical market; however; does not follow the same supply and demand model we see for other businesses. For example, physicians are bound by oath to take actions that are medically appropriate regardless of cost efficiency or any other factors. Physicians also only prescribe procedures if they are medically necessary: This greatly decreases the ability to market specific procedures to patients. With this odd inability to sell every product to every patient; the marketing picture begins to blur:

Perhaps the largest way in which marketing is unique for medicine and dentistry is that prices of medical services are usually immaterial. Due to the insurance factor and the nebulous nature of pricing for most procedures, there is not an open market for pricing these services. As such, there is not an elastic supply and demand for these goods and services based on price.

# LEFT VS. RIGHT BRAIN

|Left Brain:|Number skills, Math/Scientific skills, Written language; Spoken language, Objectivity, Analytical; Logic|
|---|---|
|Right Brain:|3D shapes, Music/Art awareness, Intuition, Creativity & Imagination; Emotion|

Fortunately, if carried out effectively, marketing can be used as a means to quell anxieties, show empathy and gain these customers as life-long patients.

# What Does Marketing Get You?

Most in the profession initially choose dentistry because they love the science or want to help people; however; many dentists also own their own business. As such, they also must know the basics of business ownership. Even though science dominates the left half of the brain, dentists must switch when thinking about marketing:

As we mesh the left and right halves of the brain in this dental-marketing combination, some goals should be set that outline what marketing will get the dentist. Often, these goals are to increase production, increase visibility, and increase a patient base.

As these goals are achieved, the benefits start to compile and, aside from increasing profits, most dentists will see:
---
# Increased acquisition of new patients

- Increased visibility
- Focused patient engagement with relevant; personalized & timely outreach
- Improved patient retention and loyalty
- Demonstrated prestige
- Connection with patients across multiple channels
- Reduced miscommunication misinformation

Many times dentists consider only how marketing will contribute to 'new patient growth'. However; new patient growth is not always the sole outcome of marketing efforts, nor should it be. Many of the above bullet points actually point to what many retailers call 'same store growth', or from the dental perspective: same patients, but more revenues. Walmart; for example, measures one of its largest growth statistics not by the numbers of new stores they add, but by how much more a single store can sell over a certain period of time. This means internal growth, not necessarily external growth. Internal growth in dentistry comes from being able to sell more elective procedures to the same patient base, as well as getting patients to accept more of the procedures the dentist will recommend as urgent and important: As dentists, we all know those patients who need many fillings, crowns, and root canals, but choose to not follow through with treatment.

In order to see how marketing plays into the internal marketing experience, it is important to lay out some baselines across the country for how patients accept dental treatment: In general, when a dentist treatment plans a procedure, it goes into the patient's chart as a 'planned' procedure: If the patient then schedules, it is considered to be 'accepted'.

The national average for patient acceptance according to Custom Practice Analytics' Jake Conway is 70-75%. This means that every patient presented with some treatment accepts at least one mode of treatment about 70% of the time. This differs from the metric 'Acceptance Rate by Dollars Treatment Planned', which is how many dollars of treatment is accepted. The national Acceptance Rate by Dollars Treatment Planned metric usually hovers around 35%. This means that if a dentist recommends $1,000 worth of treatment; the patient will schedule and accept $350 of it, or 35%.

Internal growth can occur in one of two ways. First; is when more patients accept at least one item or procedure on their treatment plan. No matter how many patients have treatment recommended to them, there are always reasons a patient may decline or delay treatment: Examples include being too busy or needing to wait for their next paycheck: Internal growth happens when more of these patients choose to prioritize their oral health, and accept at least some part of the treatment plan. When more patients accept some treatment in general, your treatment acceptance rate (by overall percentage) goes up.
---
Internal growth also occurs when patients accept a higher amount of dollars treatment planned- or more expensive treatment options. In this case, a patient will be presented with $1,000 of treatment recommended, and they choose to 'buy' more of the treatment than they otherwise would have. This is when your percentage of dollars accepted goes up.

One example of this might be when a dentist recommends two different options, where one option is less expensive and one is a higher cost. This form of internal growth comes when the patient agrees to the treatment modality that is more expensive. Internal growth can be achieved through many avenues, but consists of the collective experience, mental state, operational systemization, and marketing that can happen even before a patient enters the practice. These methods listed can increase the 'Acceptance Rate by %' or the 'Acceptance Total growth is typically considered the growth of the entire patient base and is achieved by either new patient acquisition or mitigating patient attrition. We describe attrition as a patient who has not visited the practice in the last 18 months. After a patient hits 18 months plus one day; they are counted as an attritioned patient: Unfortunately, total growth can be stunted if attrition is a major problem for a practice, even with a large influx of new patients.

# What does marketing get you? Quick Recap

1. Internal Growth
1. More patients accept treatment (Treatment Acceptance Rate by %)
2. Patients accept more expensive Treatment (Treatment Acceptance by $)
2. Total Growth
1. Increase New Patients
2. Limit Attrition (Patients who have not visited in 18 months)

# Do You Need Marketing?

If you purchased this book; you obviously think you need to understand the marketing world more and hope to bring about some sort of growth in your business. We understand these goals and applaud your initiative, but we would be amiss to not discuss the times when marketing isn't the answer:

For example, some rural dentists have full practices, booked out appointments for many weeks, and face very little competition. In these scenarios, marketing externally is not needed because the practice has already reached capacity and will face difficulty scheduling patients in a reasonable turnaround. For scenarios like this, marketing externally will only lead to increased stress, an unmanageable workload, and likely a certain amount of guilt because you will not be able to service all the patients who want to see you:

18
---
We've also seen another scenario frequently: This is when a metropolitan practice has grown fast; and is quite frankly too busy: These practices are booking out new patients 90 days into the future, and they have no trouble getting a steady flow of new patients to the practice spending zero dollars on marketing: Practices like these are trapped by physical or staff limitations, and marketing will only increase these problems.

In both of these scenarios above; we do not recommend marketing externally or trying to drive up an increase in patients. This will only lead to doctor burnout; more scheduling issues, and team turnover from stress. However; practices like these are ripe for growth in two ways. One could be internal growth, possibly by adding in more complicated procedures or selling more elective procedures like whitening; Invisalign (only part of the time is cosmetic), or BOTOX: Also, if the physical capacity hurdles can be overcome with added space, time, or staffing, growth can then occur after that is completed. So, even if you are currently at capacity, this book can help you plan for these scenarios!

# Checklist Before Marketing

There are a few things to consider before pouring all of your time, energy; and resources into marketing: Marketing is a fantastic tool, but it is not a replacement for quality services, genuine patient interaction, and efficient operational systemization.

This cannot be stressed enough. We have seen dentists who are trapped into thinking their solution to success is to 'get more new patients' or 'sell more treatment' misses the big picture of financial independence and freedom: Many times, the most successful dentists have moderate marketing budgets, but focus a significant amount of energy on their business and clinical skills. Marketing; for these high achievers, is just one piece of the pie that they focus on once a month as they set out a plan and delegate tasks to the appropriate team members to execute.

# Here are a few steps to take before you start to market:

1. Become familiar with business processes (systemization)

This is a huge hallmark of everything that the Dental Success Network teaches. Dr. Mark Costes, the Founder and CEO of Dental Success Network; is the master at systemization. Through his Elite Practice Blueprint; Dr. Costes coaches systemization to a level that is necessary for any practice to achieve success operationally or financially:

Before you can handle any growth, either in revenue or total patient flow, your practice must be systemized to a level where growth does not diminish team morale or patient experience. This includes a fully-trained team and a guest experience with scripted touchpoints to maximize a positive patient interaction.
---
Being familiar with and streamlining business processes is a key step to reducing inefficiencies within your practice and ensuring any marketing dollars spent are used effectively. If you want more ideas on how to accomplish this step, check out *The Dental Office Operations Manual*, which can be purchased on Amazon.com or at DentalSuccessNetwork.com:

# Important Point

As you start to market and grow your practice, the clinical demands might become very large on your time. You will need to make sure the systemization of your practice is high before adding in more patients. Once your marketing machine starts working, you will not have as much time to spend on developing systems because you will be extremely busy serving patients.

# 2 Analyze your practice

Yankee great Yogi Berra said, "If you don’t know where you’re going, chances are you won’t get there." When planning for growth in any business, it's important to get a baseline of key metrics and determine objectives for the practice moving forward. This includes setting goals, analyzing strengths, and determining whether your services offered match the market you are in. Sometimes, a dentist starts planning large changes to promote practice growth only to realize they might actually want a smaller practice with better overhead numbers and less working hours. Use the *Elite Practice Manifesto Scorecard Assessment* to analyze your practice, which can be found in the document vault.

# 3 Reduce overhead to 60% or below

According to the American Dental Association, the average national dental practice overhead falls somewhere around 68-72%. This means that of all the collections of the practice, 68-72% of the money goes back to pay the costs like supplies, payroll, rent, software, and yes, marketing. The remainder then goes to the doctor; at approximately 30%. With these numbers, no wonder so many dentists are stressed about finances and crushing debt loads. These numbers are alarmingly high, but can be mitigated through a few things. The goal should be at least 60% overhead at first. Getting to 60% is not easy, but is much simpler if you can follow a plan. There are entire books on reducing practice overhead, but for this manual, we encourage you to watch the videos within the continuing education section hosted on the Dental Success Network. To learn more about operational systemization and reducing overhead to 60% and below, check out the DSN course and the Elite Practice Blueprint also found in the document vault.

# 4 Establish a budget

Typically, dentists across the United States spend anywhere between 0% and 5% on marketing. The dentists who are successful and spending 0% on marketing are often in small communities.
---
where little competition exists. These markets are difficult to find but exist in the absence of corporate dentistry: The other group successfully spending 0% on marketing are long-standing dentists with such a following in the community that they do not need to market. Most dentists can approach this point after many years in the industry and a good reputation. Dentists in this group have also found the happy balance between supply, demand, and insurance participation. If you can find this balance, then spending 0% on marketing is a blessing.

As you approach larger markets with more dentists-to-population saturation; then you will see an increase in marketing spend to near 5% as a stable investment level. These are markets that tend to have some corporate dental presence, and many dentists competing for the same limited amount of patients.

Much of a budget is also structured around the needs of the dentist: If a dentist is trying to develop a new part of the practice focusing on specialty procedures, then there should be a higher spend. This spend can focus around sleep appliances, implants, orthodontics, or temporo-mandibular joint dysfunctions. These procedures generate a higher amount of income, and so dentists can justify a larger budget to generate this revenue.

Concurrently; if a dentist has many openings and capacity to maximize their practice, then spending more on marketing to bolster their patient base is a good idea. This could either be from a time or facility perspective. From a time perspective, there are many dentists who love working only 3.5 days per week, but have some openings that could possibly be filled. In this case, marketing to generate a few more new patients is a good idea to fill up the schedule on these days. After these times are filled, then marketing budgets can be dropped back to a lower level to maintain a patient flow that replaces any patients who naturally attrition out of the practice.

The other way to maximize the practice is to maximize the physical space. One example is when a dentist has 7 to 8 chairs and they want to hire another associate to help fill those chairs during the same working hours. To achieve this growth and effectively fill the new associate's schedule, the new patient flow needs to be greatly increased. In this case, spending will need to be increased to generate both emergency and new hygiene patients to help fill up those chairs during those same working hours.

# Reasons to increase budget: Quick Recap

1. Adding new procedure into the practice
2. Openings in the schedule
3. Unused physical space that could be used if patient levels grew

In certain situations, it is acceptable to go over a 5% budget. A higher budget is appropriate when the dental office is either in a growth spurt or is a newer office. When an office is a startup, revenues are generally slow to start; and the percentage spend is irregular during the first.
---
several months. Even in this scenario, it might be to set a higher spend on marketing to grow the practice as quickly as possible: For these startups, one common way to approach this is to target your percentage marketing spend following this timeframe:

|Months 0-6:|15 % of revenues|
|---|---|
|Months 6-12:|10 % of revenues|
|Months 12-24:|7 % of revenues|

The increased spending during the first two years of the practice allow for the practice to achieve high growth. This growth allows the percentage of marketing spend to be average in the overhead percentage by month 24. To be clear; it might even be difficult to spend 7% on marketing during the second year of operations if revenues have grown fast enough: This is great news for your practice and simply requires that you decrease marketing spend appropriately:

After month 24, marketing spending should typically drop to 5% or lower: This would be called the normalization period. This normalization occurs mostly because the practice can grow to average-high revenue levels by this point in time, and when you achieve these higher revenue levels, the overhead percentage usually drops because of the level of fixed expenses.

# Sample Dental LLC

|Year|Collections|Previous Budget|Percentage of Months|Total Annual Spend|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|2016|51,500,000|2020 Plan|4.00%|367,500|
|2017| |4.58%|375,000| |
|2018| |5.00%|375,000| |
|2019| |4.00%|375,000| |
|2020| |4.55%|375,000| |
|2021| |5.00%|375,000| |

# Monthly Marketing Spend

| | | | | | | | | | |Month|Google|Facebook|Mailings|Brochures|Promotions|Traditional|Website|Consulting|Other|Design|Monthly Total|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|January|606|300|5833|5400|5150|5300|1850|1200|5200|8150|55,983| | | | | | | | | | |
|February|5600|5300|5833|5150|5300|1850|1200|5200|8150|55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|March|900|3300|5833|5150|5300|1850|1200|5150| |55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|April|600|3300|5833|5150|5300|1850|1200| |8150|55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|May|600| | | |5300|5833|5150|5300|1850|1200|5150|55,583| | | | | | | | | |
|June|3600|5300|5833|3150|5300|1850|1200| |5150|55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|July|600| | | |5300|5833|5150|5300|1850|1200|5150|55,583| | | | | | | | | |
|August|900|5300|5833|5150|5300|1850|1200| |8150|55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|September|5600|5300|5833|8150|5300|1850|1200| |5150|55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|October|560|5300|5833|8150|5300|1850|1200| |5150|55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|November|601|5300|5833|5150|5300|61850|1200|5150|55,583| | | | | | | | | | | | |
|December|600|300|5833|5150|5300|1850|1200|5150| |55,583| | | | | | | | | | | |
|Annual Total|72,000|36,600|10,000|5400|81,800|36,600|22,200|14,400|2,400|1,800|867,400| | | | | | | | | | |

# 5. Develop your baseline

In order to effectively measure how your marketing is doing, you need to get a good baseline on where you stand right now: We have developed a checklist that includes some of the major points to consider in marketing: Use the following scorecard to get your baseline, which should then be periodically referenced to ensure you're on track and getting a good return on your investment:
---
# Marketing and Patient Acquisition Scorecard

Give a 1-5 on each point below:

1. We have a brand standard that includes a logo and color/font guide.
2. We have a Brand Book that includes a tagline and message to guide the use of the brand.
3. We have identified our Avatar and intentionally designed our internal/external marketing campaigns to attract the ideal patient:
4. We have a practice name that stands out and has SEO value.
5. Our entire staff understands what the brand is and they are equipped to represent it.
6. We have a website domain that is the same or near the practice name.
7. We have a professional website that is focused on user experience, customer conversion, and looks professional.
8. We own our own Google Analytics account; domain address, and website.
9. We have a system for gathering doctor/patient photos, testimonials, and online reviews for social media.
10. We have a plan in place to gather reviews, primarily for Google My Business.
11. We hold the team accountable for a certain minimum number of photos, testimonials, and online reviews per week:
12. We hold certain team members accountable for maintaining a referral generation system.
13. We have a written system for obtaining internal patient referrals.
14. We have a system for tracking the sources of each new patient and verifying its accuracy with the practice management software.
15. We have a system in place for locating and sponsoring a community outreach recipient every month.
16. We plan social media posts in advance and time them for best effect.
17. We have identified our monthly marketing budget and can calculate the ROI on each campaign that we run.
18. We have a simple, understandable report from each of our marketing campaigns that helps determine the ROI of that campaign.
19. We plan our marketing campaigns out several months in advance and diversify the delivery of our marketing to as many different effective avenues as our budget can tolerate.
20. We do not sign long term contracts for any external marketing source unless its effectiveness has been tested and tracked.
21. We have goals set for new patients and production:

Ideal Score is: 100 Your Score: /100

23
---
# In summary:

1. Become familiar with and maximize your business processes (systemization)
2. Analyze your practice
3. Reduce overhead to 60% or below
4. Establish a budget
5. Develop a baseline (and track continued progress)

As you start to market; you will find ideas that work very well, and you will also see ideas that fail. This is normal and actually much like the process of trial and error involved in most scientific exploration. As you find things that are successful - double down on these avenues to create better return on investment. Remember; however; there will be things that work for other dentists around the country, but when you try them in your area, there is very little return on investment: As you find these failures, abandon them quickly if the data shows that is the correct course of action.

There will also be other strategies that seemingly "fail" but actually lead to brand awareness and new patients, but with a slight delay or are hidden for other reasons: Watch for these as they will lead to new patients, but patients might say they found you in a different way: The key is to always track the effectiveness of each idea, figure out what is really driving the new patients, and pivot quickly when you find that certain ideas are failing or fruitful.

Now that we have reviewed everything to do before you start to market; we can continue on to the strategic marketing avenues that are available to your practice. First up is the bedrock upon which every other type of marketing is based - the brand:

DSN Members Download the Documents in the Vault

WWW.dentalsuccessnetwork.com/marketing-vault

# Included for this Chapter:

- Elite Practice Manifesto Scorecard Assessment
- Elite Practice Blueprint
- Sample Budget
- Marketing and Patient Acquisition Scorecard

24
---
# Chapter 2

# Branding

Branding is the first thing that any practice needs to do before they start any other steps in the marketing process. A product or service's brand includes its name and color scheme, along with iconography (images). This brand must be uniform across all things from the physical space all the way to the business cards.

# How Topgolf Understands Branding

On a recent visit to Topgolf with my family, I noticed something that I hadn't noticed during my visits before. They are branding fanatics who understand the tremendous value branding brings to their product and experience. Before delving deeper into the power of a strong brand, here is their definition of the Topgolf experience for those of you who have yet to experience it:

When you go to their website, you will read:

Welcome to Topgolf; your premier entertainment destination. And by entertainment destination, we're talking about a place where you can come for birthday parties, bachelor or bachelorette parties, corporate events, date nights, or just a night out with friends, and everyone will have a great time.

No matter the occasion or who you share it with, we believe that every great time starts with play, is fueled by food and drinks, moved by music and all made possible through community.

When reading how Topgolf defines itself, there is one thing that sticks out to me. Their core experience is golfing; but their brand is entertainment with friends and family.
---
mentioned once in their description. People know its a destination, and they sell how you golf experiential marketing and something every dental office can do. In essence, its the "patient experience" we refer to Chapter 7 and Internal Marketing:

# With Topgolf

they understand that the experience is paramount, but the interesting thing is that golf is secondary in their mission: From the moment you enter the Topgolf property, their brand is front and center. That is typical of a well-refined business because they understand the significance of shaping a brand into an experience. Topgolf takes branding to another level. While in your bay listening to music, eating, drinking and playing, you are surrounded by Topgolf. They place their logo, name and brand identity in areas most other businesses would never think of. These are the little touches that make a huge difference.

Their logo and name are in places you expect like the machine that feeds you the ball, the food menu; safety signs and golf clubs. But it is also in places you'd never expect; like the radiant heaters above your head and switches that control them: They brand every touchpoint possible. You will not forget where you are, what the company name is, what their logo looks like: The Topgolf icon will be ingrained in your head, and hopefully linked with memories of premier entertainment:

# HEATER CONTROLS

TopGolf

# How does this relate to dentistry?

Dentistry is an experience that has many touchpoints patients interact with before, during and after their appointment: Why leave those touchpoints generic or unbranded? You have the opportunity for your patients to visually remember who you are and then associate that with the quality experience you provide. While it may seem a bit overboard to brand every single touchpoint in the office, the difference between you and a competitor might be accentuated by these branding pieces, and thus earn you a patient for life.

# What's the point here?

The main key is to brand everything: Go beyond ensuring your name and logo are on the website and building, and add them to places that are much more personal and unexpected. So, do not use the generic ADA-branded brochures. Do not use generic postcards: Do not use generic reminder cards. Each touchpoint is an opportunity, don't waste it.

26
---
# What Is Branding" Anyway?

Your practice's mission, vision, core values, logo, and typography are all a part of your brand, as well as the physical look and feel of your office. The first step toward creating an effective brand is identifying the qualities your practice embodies that make you stand apart from the competition: This could be how you give back to the community, or it could be the specific types of procedures you do. Whatever this unique characteristic is, use it to your advantage!

Big companies know that branding is important: As of 2021, Apple remains the number one ranked brand globally: Valued at approximately $322,999 million, Apple's brand alone is worth a staggering $122,332 million more than the next ranked brand.

So how is this idea of brand value calculated? Simply put; brand value is a measure of the total net worth of your brand: Key factors about brand value include:

- Brand recognition: Have consumers heard of you?
- Brand image: How do consumers perceive you?
- Brand usage: Are customers actively buying from you and using your product?
- Brand loyalty: Do customers stick with you over the competition?

Companies like Apple have invested millions to increase their brand value, because they know an iconic brand is a valuable asset. Apple also stands apart from other companies due to the effectiveness of their branding: Part of their success in branding is the obsessive eye they have given to their brand over the past 30 years. Their simplistic logo, creative advertising, and focus on the consumers' emotions have given them a strong lead in brand value that has multiplied over time. It also doesn't hurt that they create physical products that have become nearly permanent fixtures in our hands and on our desks.

# How We Look at Branding

This next image shows why branding is the first chapter in this book. The six components work in conjunction to optimize marketing efforts and to create a holistic marketing strategy: Once fully implemented they act as a cycle directing the patient; or potential patient; to the next step. The cycle of brand awareness, conversion marketing and patient experience strengthens over time, creating the end goal of raving fans, but it all starts with branding:

27
---
# 03

# BRAND AWARENESS, BRAND STRENGTHENS

# CONVERSION

Patient strengthens brand for demographic through word of mouth & online reviews.

# 04

# MAKING A DECISION

Demographic makes a decision after a "call to action" advertisement.

# MARKETING STRATEGY

# SETTING THE BRAND

Demographic becomes familiar with the brand.

# 05

# TRUST INCREASES

Brand trust and validity increases, resulting in higher call to action ad success.

# NEW PATIENTS

More new patients have positive experience in office and refer family/friends:

# 06

# CMO Share

# DATA-Driven Dental Marketing

# Why Branding Works

The basis for all branding is familiarity: According to research done in the 1960s by Axelrod, and Haley and Case in the 1970s, familiarity, and the subsequent likability, is the basis for why we choose some name brands over lesser-known brands. The research pointed to the fact that we choose things we are familiar with, because it takes less brain-energy to do so. Even for reasons we do not process consciously, we will always pick things we are more familiar with simply because of our comfort level with those things.

Amos Tversky and Nobel-winning Psychologist Daniel Kahneman did more research on this natural tendency and named the phenomenon the Familiarity Heuristic. According to Wikipedia: In psychology, a heuristic is an easy-to-compute procedure or "rule of thumb" that people use when forming beliefs, judgments or decisions: The familiarity heuristic was developed based on the discovery of the availability heuristic by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman; it happens when the familiar is favored over novel places, people, or things: The familiarity heuristic can be applied to various situations that individuals experience in day-to-day life.
---
these situations appear similar to previous situations, especially if the individuals are experiencing a high cognitive load, they may regress to the state of mind in which they have felt or behaved before. This heuristic is useful in most situations and can be applied to many fields of knowledge; however, there are both positives and negatives to this heuristic as well:

To examine this effect, the two Israeli scientists developed a test for the students at their respective universities: Tversky and Kahneman created an experiment in order to test this heuristic. They devised four lists of 39 names. Each list contained 19 female names and 20 male names. Half of the lists had famous female names, and the other half had famous male names. They showed the lists to two test groups: The first group was shown a list and asked to recall as many names as possible. The second group was shown a list and asked to determine if there were more female or more male names: The subjects who heard the list with famous female names said there were more female names than there were male names. Similarly, the subjects who heard the list with famous male names recalled more male names than female names. Thus the familiarity heuristic is defined as "judging events as more frequent or important because they are more familiar in memory."

An even more basic understanding of this could be from our reptilian brain and the basic 'caveman' instinct that has kept our species alive and brain-energy consumption low. In the wilderness, if we see something new, it has never been evolutionarily advantageous to see what it is. That fuzzy-looking spider that we see on the road? That's a tarantula, it just bit us, and now we have a bad chance of making it back to the cave for dinner. In the same way, we like to conserve brain energy and we like to see patterns. If we think there's a pattern, our brain will try to find some way to process that pattern so we can make sense of it.

As you start to develop your brand, you can lean on this heuristic to produce customer loyalty, promote awareness, and attract new customers. With this marketing, either internal or external, the familiarity breeds more customers who will pick your brand over a competitor solely based on the fact that they have seen your brand more often. Work to develop this familiarity, and you will see positive changes and growth in the practice.

Once patients pick your office, it is also important to remember that the design and feel of your brand has a direct correlation to perceived quality and value of your dentistry. The truth of the matter is that you can be a fantastic dentist and still struggle to attract and retain patients if your brand isn't reflective of the quality services offered. Your brand, and brand continuity, play a huge role in everything downstream, so make sure you are using these features of the practice to your advantage.

# Important Point

29
---
# Brand Continuity with Decor

One problem we see a lot is that a dentist will have an upscale brand, but an older-looking office with no updates. Oftentimes, you can become immune to seeing this, and even forget that your office looks dated. In this case, make sure you get new carpet; a fresh coat of paint; and an updated look. The office decor says more about your dentistry than the contact-tightness on your Class 2 Restoration. Hiring an interior decorator and designer can be relatively cheap; and can be quantified as a marketing cost:

# Creating Your Brand & Keys to Branding

In order to fully understand why branding works, remember the four steps in the consumer mind frame:

1. Recognition
2. Likability
3. Decision
4. Purchase

When thinking about branding; the goal is to build a brand strong enough to skip the first two steps and drive straight to Decision and Purchase. A good brand has strong recognition, and the consumer knows if they like or dislike the organization (think of why we choose to shop at Walmart over Target): Once a brand can reach a point of skipping the first two steps, they save time and money because they no longer have to invest into cultivating recognition and likeability:

This is similar to all brands in all different areas of the business-consumer and business business market. Once brand awareness has been built to a certain level, then they don't have to invest as much in other types of marketing:

In order to develop brand awareness to this level, you must establish your brand as the bedrock foundation before everything else. No doubt about it, this takes time, energy; and investment: A prominent online presence, effective internal/external marketing, tracking, and substantial return on investment are all important aspects of a successful marketing program, but it all starts with branding: While branding is not necessarily a call to action that pushes someone towards decision and purchase, the consistency allows you to gain more traction with potential patients when you actually do have a call to action. Then, when people who have noticed your brand do see an ad, they are more likely to respond and actually convert into a new patient:

As you go through the process of branding; you will start with a name and icon, then expand that into colors, fonts, and interior design standards that will help keep your brand consistent throughout the entire patient experience.
---
# Choosing a Name

If your practice is new and without a name, choosing the perfect one can feel immensely daunting as you look to everything around you for inspiration: We have a few suggestions to speed up the process and help you arrive upon a great name.

# Here's our simple rules:

1. No Doctor Names. We do not recommend including the doctor name in the practice name. This is seen as 'old-school', and will create rebranding issues for the next doctor if you choose to sell the practice upon retirement: In a situation where you are changing the name of the practice away from the retiring doctor; rebranding actually decreases the value of your practice. The new owner will lose any established brand value. You must also consider that you might grow to add an associate someday, and at that point; having only one doctor's name represented will only complicate the growth process. So, as a general rule: no doctor names.
2. The name needs to be easy to spell, speak, and read. Think of your front desk phone employees. They will be saying your name at least 25-50 times a day: The easier it is to speak the name of your practice, the quicker and less confusing the phone conversation will be. A general rule is that fewer syllables is better: For speaking, look at the consonants and vowels in the word. Make sure that any name you pick has a good balance of each and does not cause a tongue-tie! For reading, if your name is simpler to read, then billboards will be more successful for people driving by at 45 mph: In general, the shorter the word or name you pick; the more effective it will be in both written and spoken form. Example of poor choice: Chesapeake Bay Family Dentistry: Ten syllables, long name, and hard to fit onto many marketing materials. Good choice: Gentle Dental.
3. Names might be slightly 'geographic' in nature. Great names usually have some sort of meaning to the doctor or area of the practice. If you're in the mountains, there may be names of geographic features that mean something to the community: Maybe your practice is in the great plains, then you would use something that indicates a connection with that area. In any sense, a name that 'makes sense' is a good idea. One thing to avoid is a name that ties you to a shopping center: If your practice moves or expands away from that center; then your name might become less meaningful and require rebranding: So be careful about the geographic connection if it's not overly positive or neutral.
4. Shorter the better: The best names are short and simple. Overall, shorter names make branding simpler: Fewer letters means you can use a larger font on marketing materials such as postcards and shirts, which increases visibility and brand recognition. Additionally, these names are more impactful and tend to be easier for patients to remember.
5. Your name and iconography will have to work together: If you're already set on an icon, then your name will have to work well with that visual. The name will also have to complement whatever interior design you have set out for yourself. For example; if your interior design is extremely modern, then the name should match (or at least not clash) with that feeling: The bottom line is creating a cohesive brand where all aspects of the brand work together to send a clear; unified message.
---
Make who you are and what you do obvious. Why are people coming to you?

Because you are a dentist and they need one. Don't forget to include the word dental/dentistry/dental arts/etc. prominently in your name.

# Quick Recap

1. No Doctor Names
2. Needs to be easy to spell, speak and read.
3. Might be slightly 'geographic' in nature.
4. Shorter the better.
5. Name and iconography will have to work together:
6. Make who you are and what you do obvious:

# Logo

One large component of branding is your practice's logo. A company's logo is often a primary identifier of the business. Think about companies like Apple, Nike, Walmart; or Amazon. Their logos are simplistic and instantly convey who they are. Aim for a simple logo that doesn't require much thought or background to understand:

The logos shown here are simple, bold, easily readable, and have been strategically designed to convey the brand of their now iconic companies. These companies' logos are identifiable and have trained our brains to automatically correlate the logo with the products each company provides.

Although a dental logo may not have the national reach that Amazon or Apple have, your goal lies in becoming iconic and recognizable within your local community:

When designing your logo, look at nearby competitors and try to stand apart. A unique logo can elevate your image and help establish your practice as a reputable/high quality business. The key aspects of a quality logo are clean colors, easily definable shapes, and readable font. Ask yourself: Will the logo work well as a t-shirt or sign design? Can it be embroidered on scrubs? Will it be easily readable and identifiable as drivers quickly glance at the sign above your practice door as they pass by?

Consider incorporating a stand-alone icon into the design.

Use easily definable shapes and readable fonts.

Ask yourself if it will be readable from afar (Ex: on a local football sponsorship banner):
---
Avoid using gradients, as this will not print cleanly or work as signage.

Use colors that evoke positive thoughts and emotions.

Be deliberate with all aspects of the logo.

Think of all the uses of the logo to ensure that it will work for each use.

Billboards; t-shirts, website, brochures, stickers, embroidery.

If your logo is long horizontally, consider having your designer also create a stacked version. You will favor one to use more consistently, but having the option of a vertical and horizontally arranged logo will allow you to stand out more when fitting parameters of signs and sponsorship opportunities that are more long or tall.

If your icon doesn’t have an obvious "dental" icon, like a tooth or toothbrush; then the word 'dental' should be the key focus. If somebody is driving by your building or sign and cannot tell quickly what kind of establishment you are, your logo is not helping you as much as it could be.

# CASTLE MOOREHEAD FAMILY DENTISTRY

# THE DENTIST OF SIOUXLAND

Next are some of the colors and feelings that go along with iconography in the marketing world. These colors and words evoke feelings and connections that most people do not even realize. It is through these connections that marketers are able to build a much deeper story about their brand, without having to use as much information: Take a look at some of the colors and words and think about your favorite brands:

|RED|ORANGE|PURPLE|BLUE|GREEN|BLACK|WHITE|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|EXCITEMENT|SUCCESS|ROYALTY|DEPENDABLE|WEALTH|POWER|PURITY|
|POWER|FRIENDLINESS|IMAGINATIVE|TRUST|GROWTH|DOMINANCE|EFFICIENCY|
|ENERGY|COURAGE|CREATIVE|INTELLIGENCE|TRANQUILITY|LUXURY|SAFETY|
|ATTENTION|HAPPINESS|AUTHENTICITY|SECURITY|NATURE|PROTECTION|INNOCENCE|
|STRENGTH|CONFIDENCE|LUXURY|COMMUNICATION|SECURITY|SOPHISTICATION|CLEANLINESS|
|PASSION|CHANGE|EXTRAVAGANCE|CALMING|HARMONY|INTELLIGENCE|CLARITY|

Cc Ccta Premier Walmart Tropicana Uber Shutterty Leogue CBD NETFLIX DuNkin' Cultch VISA Way MIKE Avoi #M TARGET abia Roku You ube FBL FedEx OEO Spotify CHANEL
---
As you think of logos with the color blue, brands like Delta Airlines or United Airlines may come to mind. As reflected in the graphic above, the color blue is often associated with feelings of security, dependability, and trustworthiness. It's a no brainer that these companies want you to think of their airlines as dependable or trustworthy: Southwest Airlines logo, on the other hand, has orange, blue, and purple coloring, which connotes more happiness and creativity of the company. Incorporating meaningful colors into a logo is not only done by airlines. In fact, all smart companies consider the importance of color in their iconography. For example, most wealth management brands pick the color green to base their icon, due to the connections with wealth and growth.

The next page shows logos that myCMOshare has either created or redesigned for clients in the dental field across the country. At first glance, there are a few things that stand out in these logos. First, each of these brands do not contain any gradient shading and are modern in appearance. Second, the text is very simple and easily readable from both near and far. You'll also notice that the icons and text are mixed in many cases, which allows for instant recognition of the brand without actually having to read the words.

|ICON/FONT STYLES|FINALIZING STYLES|COLOR SELECTION|FINAL LOGO|
|---|---|---|---|
|N E B R A $ K A|DENTAL|N E B R A $ K A DENTAL|C E N T E R|
| |DENTAL| | |

By using these rules, you should be able to come up with a name and icon that work together to help you create the dental brand you desire.

# Quick Recap

1. Consider what it will look like on clothing, billboards, and print materials.
2. No color-fade or color gradients.
3. Consider adding in text and iconography together as one.
4. Choose colors that follow your brand.
5. Make text easy to read.
---
# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

# CAPITAL DENTISTRY

# PEAKDENTAL

# DENTAL

# Sona SBeach N)

# MISSION CASTLE

# DENTAL HEALTH

# DENTAL FAMILY DENTISTRY

# The Dentist OF SiouXland

# DR. KARK COSTES DENTAL CENTER

# Tuf 5 U B U R B ^ N

# RADIANT FAMILY DENTISTRY

# 35
---
# Office Decor Design

The next important piece of your brand is the physical practice. You can have a beautiful logo and image but end up creating cognitive dissonance with your new patients if the physical practice does not match that feeling created online or in your marketing: While the logo can be a big part of a patients perception, the overall feel of the office has the largest influence on patients' feelings toward your practice. Patients don't know how good your restorations or crowns look; but if your office is clean, looks organized, and smells nice, they will use this as their perception of quality.

So how do we impact the office brand in our physical office space? Use these items below as a checklist:

- Promote cleanliness; freshness, newness, and have a professional look feel: Give your waiting room a modern living room feel, or at least a comfortable-professional.
- Provide water; carbonated water; or coffee to elevate the experience.
- Use neutral scents from scent machines.
- Make sure sterilization and appearance are clean. Patients may worry that sterilization isn't a priority if the office doesn't appear clean and organized.
- Clean bathrooms are extremely important: Ensure they stay clean with frequent team checks.
- Reduce clutter to create a sanitary and fresh feel.
- Market the experience patients will have when they visit the office.
- Office decor should be updated and uncluttered.
- Touch-up the paint on walls that have scuff marks, keep carpets and upholstery clean; keep floorboards and other surfaces dust free.
- Update equipment and technology to stay up to date with changes in dentistry.

Your brand and overall office atmosphere should match. If your brand is fun, colorful, and playful; then your office furniture and decor would reflect that energy with colorful seats, fun carpet patterns, or bright wall colors. This might also mean that your employee uniform is tie-dye shirts and your phone scripts are more playful and humorous.

However, if you're trying to sell high-end aesthetics, then your office will be much different: Your waiting room will be outfitted with fancy couches, the lighting will bear a chandelier-type appearance, and the front office staff will wear professional clothing rather than scrubs. Again, the iconography of the brand will also match this and consist of subdued colors and fonts that make you think of high-end brands. The paperwork you receive from a high-end aesthetics office might be thicker paper; and the toothbrush given at the end of the appointment might be of higher quality than the typical brush.

The end goal is for every aspect of your practice to tie into your unique brand. All marketing materials, including cards, brochures, shirts, etc. need to have a consistent feel that can be.
---
directly traced to the practice's brand. This cohesive feel can be accomplished by using the same font and color scheme across all marketing and brand related materials, and then matching the quality and feelings of those choices in the office setting, and appearance.

For example, when you see these two different offices, you come up with two different impressions of the experience based solely on appearances:

# Office #1:

This office above looks clean and modern with pops of color that evoke a certain level of fun or happiness. At first glance, thoughts of a pediatric office might come to mind. Whether it is a design to help children feel comfortable or to help adults relax, the crisp, white elements promote a feeling of cleanliness, which gives an impression of high-end dentistry:

# Office #2:

This office, while still modern and clean, has an entirely different look. The contemporary yet inviting colors, sleek furniture, and clean appearance, give the impression to the patient that this office is modern, up-to-date, and technologically advanced:

Both offices are beautiful, clean and modern, yet they give the brand an entirely different personality: This is what we mean when we say the office interior should enhance the logo and brand.

37
---
The feel of both offices help the patient assume the quality of work is as fine as the office itself: Is that necessarily the case? Not at all! Could both offices give high quality dentistry and have beautiful fillings? Absolutely! Could an office that is completely outdated with torn lobby seats and paint chips on the walls also create beautiful fillings? Most certainly! However, we know that judgments about people, places, and things almost automatically: In the blink of an eye, our brains have already judged offices 1 and 2 in different lights.

# Differentiating Your Brand

With so many products and services currently in the marketplace, it's difficult to find ways to stand out. A product or service can be replicated by your competitors in a matter of weeks now; resulting in a saturated market. The differentiating factors you must rely on to set yourself apart from the competition are branding and operations - there are no other levers to pull anymore. It used to be different; you used to be able to differentiate based on a new feature, function or service that stands out from the competition. This is extremely hard to accomplish in current times because of the speed of go-to-market and the digital world we are in.

As you look to develop your brand, it is also important to avoid branding that looks too much like your competition. This would include colors, names or icons that are too similar. In these cases, the similarity can actually cause a great deal of confusion to prospective, or even current, patients. This could also lead to wasted marketing efforts if you market your new brand, patients confuse it with another brand, and then the other dental practice gets the patient's attention.

A common mistake is brands and names that are too similar and located within the same geographic area. This can easily become a point of friction between two dentists in the same town; which can lead to an uncomfortable conversation or legal action. In order to avoid this, we encourage you to do extensive research in your area to address your competition's brand. A competition analysis should include:

- Name, both of doctors and practice or corporate brand
- Colors
- Themes
- Icons

Once you have a firm handle on these aspects of your competitor's brand, you can ensure that any of your branding efforts will not imitate an existing brand in your area.

# Mimic Successful Brands

Adversely, a beneficial strategy would be to piggy-back on the marketing efforts of other brands you wish to replicate outside of the dental field. In this approach, your marketing strategy could follow in the design philosophy and branding of a non-dental company you admire. For example, if you...
---
were to try to create a dental practice with the feel of a Walt Disney resort; then you might take inspiration from the theme and colors of the Disney brand. You might like the aesthetic feel of the Apple brand and Apple retail stores. Perhaps your dental practice has existing large windows and follows the aesthetic feel of the Apple stores with granite tile floors and light oak stained wood for cabinetry and tables. You can take it a step further and emulate the Apple brand in other ways as well: You might want to keep your iconography in grayscale, and keep the text simple. In this way, patients would unconsciously associate your dental brand with a high-quality brand the Apple Corporation has cultivated over the last 40 years.

# Changing or Updating your Brand

Most dentists, after reviewing the basic tenets of quality branding listed above, will agree it might be time to update their brand. This update could be as small as adjusting a few colors, or it could be as drastic as changing the practice name. Many times, it will include modernizing the colors; font; or icon in order to bring the practice into the 21st Century:

As you approach the issue of changing your brand, we encourage you to think carefully about your practice, the services you provide, and how that plays into the brand you want to build and promote. It is also extremely important to look at your current market base when changing your brand. When transitioning a brand, it is less about how we see ourselves and a lot more about how the market already views us. You must understand your current market perception and emotional connections before rebranding, as this is where you need to start:

Use the guidelines presented in this manual to begin updating your brand. Try not to completely abandon the previous brand, as this can be disorienting to current patients and is wasteful of previous efforts and established brand awareness. For example, if Walmart suddenly came out with a new brand similar to Ethan Allen, it would likely not be successful. Walmart already has a brand, much more than a logo. Since Walmart has a firmly established company and image, they must build off what they already have: Even if Walmart wanted to transition a feature of their marketing strategy, the starting point should be based on current perception:

39
---
# Rebrand Checklist

# Who We Are

- Corporate Mission
- Values
- Brand Vision
- Differentiators
- Market Research

# Core Messages

- Positioning Statement
- Brand Attributes
- Tagline
- Target Audience
- Key Messaging

# Brand Standards

- Brand Logo Guide
- Print Colors (CMYK)
- Pantone Colors (FMS)
- Web Colors (RGB)
- Typography Guidelines
- Imagery Guidelines

# Marketing

- Website & SEO
- Facebook
- LinkedIn
- YouTube
- Instagram
- Google My Business
- Brochures
- Direct Mail Letter Postcard
- Press Release

# Operations

- DBA "Doing Business As"
- Business and Appointment Cards
- Leremead
- Updated Email Templates
- Email Signature
- Invoice Template
- Referral Cards
- Business Envelopes
- Pens
- New Patient Gift Thank You
- Thank You Cards & Envelopes
- Notepads
- Telephone Greeting
- Primary Exterior Sign
- Door Sign Vinyl
- Interior Signage
- Uniforms Apparel
- Name tags
- Patient Take Home Bag

# Human Resources

- Employee Handbook
- Job Descriptions
- Training Materials
- Recruitment Material Formats
- Employment Agreements
- HR Branded Folder
- Social Media Guidelines

Since rebranding is sometimes a very complicated task, we encourage you to seek advice from a professional on this project. We have seen some dentists go through a rebrand, only to find out that a competitor uses the same colors, font, and extremely similar icon. When that happens, either customer confusion or lawsuits over copyrights can follow. Having a professional team to help you through the process can be a good idea to avoid those messy issues later.
---
Next is an example of one logo of a dental office that was rebranded with a new icon. In the original logo, you can see that there are a couple graphic design aspects that are difficult to reproduce routinely: Three colors, a colored name, and two different places with gradients. These features all led to a logo that was difficult to reproduce consistently on mediums like postcards and tshirts.

After the redesign, the gradient and colors were removed, but keeping the red flag and overall shape helped provide continuity and recognizability with the old logo. The lines were all simplified, and the font was also simplified to a sans serif font. These changes all led to an icon much simpler to print and stitch onto clothing and a better representation of the practice.

# CASTLE FAMILY DENTISTRY

Old logo (left) and rebranded logo (right)

As you go through the rebranding process, remember to keep your name, icon, and colors as simple as possible for the longevity of the brand: The outcome should be a brand that you are proud of and that is meaningful to you as the owner.

When comparing the old and new logos above for Castle Family Dentistry, you will notice that the old one evokes more of an outdated feeling: The gradient, the traditional font, and the colors are no longer relevant by today's standards. The second logo, after the rebrand, or in this case, 'refresh', brings the entire logo up to a more modern feel. The neutral dark and light grays with the pop of red and/or gold are easy on the eyes: The illustration is contemporary and cleaner than the previous design, and the simple lines and fonts give an overall strong, memorable feeling.

# MOOREHEAD FAMILY DENTISTRY

The next logo, belonging to Moorehead Family Dentistry, has undergone a similar refresh. The font is updated, the logo loses its 'shadow' effect, and the word dentistry is now the focal point.
---
# MOOREHEAD FAMILY DENTISTRY

Old logo (left) and rebranded logo (right)

After setting your brand, you will want to systemize the way you present it across all formats. The best way to achieve this tactical continuity of the brand is to create a Brand Book. Below is the process along with examples on how to create this internal piece.

# Creating your Brand Book

One great way to keep track of the many elements that make up your unique brand is by creating a brand book. This brand book is a compilation of everything about your practice, from the founding story to colors and fonts:

First, outline your mission, vision, and core values. Dr. Mark Costes and the team at Dental Success Institute have described these in great detail and they hold this as one of the best things to do early on in your practice ownership journey: Here's a quick summary of the Mission Statement, Vision Statement, and Core Values from Dr. Costes:

# Mission Statement:

This is what your company actually does. It should be short and easy to memorize. A lot of companies get this wrong and end up using big fancy words that don’t tell us anything. Your mission statement should also be specific enough that people understand what you do and how it may differ from your competitors.

So for example:

- Public Broadcasting System (PBS): To create content that educates, informs and inspires.
- Google: To organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful.
- Make-A-Wish: We grant the wishes of children with life-threatening medical conditions to enrich the human experience with hope, strength and joy.

# Vision Statement:

42
---
This is what your company aspires to be, which can be much different than what a company is (mission statement): When done right, your vision statement can and should help drive decisions and goals in your company. Sometimes it is best to think about a 10 year goal and actually put numbers into the Vision statement to understand the vision more clearly:

# Here are some examples of some good vision statements:

- Ford: To become the world's leading Consumer Company for automotive products and services.
- Avon: To be the company that best understands and satisfies the product; service and self-fulfillment needs of women globally.

# Core Values:

Core values are what support the vision, shape the culture, and reflect what your company values. They are your company's principles, beliefs, or philosophy of values. Try limiting your core values to 3 to 7 statements. Once you get beyond this, it's hard for your employees to remember: Remember to keep these statements simple, and make sure these core values are used in your recruitment process, on-boarding process, and accountability agreements.

# Here's a list of examples:

- Have each other's backs
- Demonstrate passion
- Bring high energy

# Great books to read if you want more on the subject of mission, vision and core values:

- Traction by Gino Wickman
- Start with Why by Simon Sinek

Once you have those initial parts figured out, then work together with your team to brainstorm ideas and think about the smaller details that make your practice stand apart from the competition. This brainstorming should encompass both the details of the internal and external culture of the practice. Consider breaking this down into two sections: "What it's like to work here" and "What it's like to be a patient here." Often the two are tremendously different. For a prime example, look at Disney: From the guest perspective, their brand is fun, family friendly; and joyful. As an employee, while positivity is emphasized, they are also ruthless about systemization of the guest experience, always learning and improving, and doing everything to create magical moments for guests.

Next, list important components of the guest experience you intend to provide. This could include ways to speak to clients, the specific pathway of a patient through your practice, or the verbiage you use to effectively communicate during specific situations. These keys to your patient experience can help set the tone for new employees, and these details are an absolutely essential part of your brand:

Be sure to include images of your logo and any sample or mock-up marketing materials. This could include any t-shirts, cups, or other marketing materials you've created. Remember;
---
# Brand Book Guidelines

From the logo and icon, you will want to include the specific fonts and colors featured in your branding; with their exact RGB color code. Once completed, the brand book will serve as a tool to reference when creating new marketing materials, setting practice goals, or even welcoming new staff members. Your brand book should include the following items:

- Name of the practice, parent company if applicable
- Names of its doctors, acceptable names, spelled correctly, how they like to be referred to
- A history of the practice and how it has evolved over time, including additions of new doctors and/or locations
- The Mission, Vision, and Core Values of the practice
- "What it's like to work here" Internal Culture
- "What it's like to be a patient here" External Culture
- Logos - horizontal and vertical settings if applicable
- Fonts used
- Colors used - give RGB numbers, CMYK numbers, HTML code for colors and PMS (Pantone)
- Images - have links to image folders
- Previously used pieces - billboards, mailers, t-shirts, stickers, & cards

It may seem like a no-brainer to keep all this stuff, but this comprehensive document will help greatly any time you are marketing. Many dentists these days do not have a full-time graphic designer that they can use consistently to do work for them. In these cases, dentists will find private contractors on work-share websites, and hire them for a few hours to fulfill project work. Oftentimes, you will not get the same designer for more than a project or two. For these times, it is important to give a copy of the 'Brand Book' to any person who is working with you; to ensure that what they are designing is within the confines of what you expect your brand to look like. This not only ensures a higher end-product, but it also will make the work faster and most likely cheaper.
---
# Brand Book for Capital Dental

# About Capital Dental

We are a doctor-owned dental practice in Nebraska, housed in a state-of-the-art office and offering a fantastic guest experience. Founded by Drs. Addison Killeen and Brandon Chapek in 2019, it was merged with All Smiles Dentistry and moved to a new location in July 2019. It is now housed at 27th and Old Cheney in a beautiful facility with visibility of about 45,000 cars per day.

# Mission

Our mission is to be the most community-oriented dental practice in the state. We will accomplish this through radical generosity and by building our foundation on a patient base we call family.

# Vision

Our vision is to have expertly trained doctors, a close-knit staff, and a growing business that supports all its employees at one location with 8-10 doctors.

# Core Values

- Fantastic guest experience
- Always be improving
- Hungry & Humbly confident
- Have each other's backs
---
# Guest Experience

The first thing to notice in the experience is that we don't use the word 'patient'. While we want you to be patient, we don't want you to treat guests like patients. Someone coming into your home or office is a guest; and should be treated like an old family member coming home to visit. This starts at the first interaction.

At the front desk; guests should be paired with their picture to then welcome them with their first name. The next thing we say to guests is to welcome them to our office, offer them espresso, coffee, water or sparkling water. After that, we then ask them for information and start the check-in process:

When they are first brought back; guests should be given the 'tour'. This includes opening and closing the door behind the patient, showing them the bathroom, checkout stations, 3-D x-ray unit, and then leading them back to their appropriate room.

Once seated, guests are shown some of the features we offer to create a 'relaxing guest experience', including the laughing gas for $5. Highlighting these items creates a little more realization in the guests' head that we are a DIFFERENT sort of dental practice!

Before doing clinical work, do your best to ask 3 non-dental questions, and learn things about the guest to form a personal connection or bond: Guests want to see that you are a REAL PERSON, and they want to feel you understand them. This 'banter' allows the space for a connection to form so that you can better understand them and they can feel more comfortable with you.

Once starting any procedure, you should always check 3 times that the patient is comfortable. Usually do this at the 10 second mark; the 1 minute mark; and 5 minute mark. This gives the patient any chance to let you know if something is bothering them, or if they are uncomfortable in any way. Even though most of the time they won't have any issues, asking the questions lets them know that you care.

If a patient ever becomes unhappy or upset for any reason, it is your job to listen and try to diffuse the situation. Be sure to listen to them (many times a patient just needs somebody to vent to and understand their frustrations). Be sure to apologize that they are feeling this way and respond appropriately with a solution that will ease their frustrations.

Doctors:
---
# Dr. Addison Killeen "Dr. Killeen" (k-ih-]-EE-n)

# Dr. Brandon Chapek "Dr. Chapek" (CH-AE-P-jh-k)

# Dr. Kelsey Sasse "Dr. Sasse" (Sass-EE)

# How to connect with patients and make them feel at home:

# Ask Open-ended questions

Most people enjoy talking about themselves because it is easy: Open-ended questions generate conversation and encourage the patient to open up. Start by asking how their day is going, what they have planned for the weekend. If they start talking about a baseball game they are going to ask about it further does their grandchild play? Is it their son? Is it the Saltdogs? Do they go to Saltdogs games? Add in something personal about yourself a lot of "Oh I haven't ever been to a Saltdogs game, I'll have to go too."

The more you talk to your patient; the more you'll learn about them and connect. It will make their next visit that much more enjoyable!

# Listening

Practice Active listening. It's easy to tune out as a patient is talking, but you'll make a much stronger connection if you pay attention to them and engage. Ask relevant questions to keep the conversation going:

# Show Enthusiasm

Small talk will come easy to some and is more challenging for others. Like anything, practice makes perfect. It is OK to have the same conversation with every patient you encounter: If that makes it easy and more manageable for you personally, do it!

View patient conversations as an opportunity to learn more about people. You never know who you will meet or what they'll share with you that may be interesting and entertaining!
---
# Logos

# CAPITAL DENTAL

|LiGht BLUE|DARK BLUE|Font|
|---|---|---|
|Pantone P115-16|PANTONE P 10 1 16 C|Linotype Gianotten Heavy|
|C:7 422|C:10 0 M : 8 9 :41 K:5 1|6.158 8e21|
|A1a9ed 9|#0 C10 4 1| |

# A LTERNATiV E A CCEPTA B L E U S E $

# CAPITAL DENTAL

# ~DENTAL

# ~DENTAL

# Text & Fonts

- Avenir
- Avenir Heavy
- Avenir Black

# 48
---
# Images & Photographv

Office photos: https://drive.google.com/open

Professional Photos: https://drive.google.com/open

# Billboards & Mailers Used

|CAPHTAL|CAPHTAL|
|---|
|CAPHTAL|CAPHTAL|
|Dr. Brandon Chapek|'5Laaahig 685|
|Dᴬᵈᵈˢᵒʳ Klieer|MyCapitalDental.com|
|SCHEDULE ONLINE|402420.0292|

# Lshirts Designed

END Example Brand Book

49
---
# Brand Awareness & Strengthening

As you start to market your new practice or a new brand, you will want to focus on a type of marketing called 'brand awareness'. The entire goal of this type of marketing is to start to get this brand into the mind of potential patients. This marketing does not have a lot of 'Calls to Action' (CTA encouragement); but rather works to get the logo and name in front of as many buyers as possible. If you are small and trying to grow, then this marketing is almost all external, including billboards, radio, and mailing pieces.

Be cautious when trying to track brand awareness, as the effectiveness of this type of marketing cannot be accurately analyzed in terms of new patients or production: The reason why these are not good indicators is because the goal of brand awareness is more about exposure. Exposure does not immediately lead to return-on-investment: Exposure only leads to conversions with later marketing efforts.

# Common Question

Question: Should we be using trackable phone numbers on each mailer campaign we do out in the community? Separate numbers on billboards? Separate number on the website?

Answer: We used to be proponents of doing trackable phone numbers, but now with everyone having a cell phone and double-checking the authority of your website, trackable phone numbers often reveal very little about the success of a particular marketing tool. Even if an individual sees your billboard; they will check your reviews before calling to schedule. Almost any marketing effort you put out there will lead to a website or Google Business Profile visit prior to the final buying decision. It is for these reasons that trackable phone numbers are far less informative in today's marketing world. More about this in later chapters.

This can be confusing, but it happens very frequently that patients will say that a website was how they found a dental practice. While that might have been true, they only knew to look for a website because they had seen it in a mailer or on a billboard. So while the website gets credit for generating a new patient, it could have actually been the billboard that played a major part: With this in mind, it is not a good idea to evaluate marketing efforts solely on how patients say they found you: Remember that it is a mixture of branding as well as other aspects that play a huge role in acquiring new patients.

As your practice grows to a desirable size, then you can start leveraging internal marketing efforts to strengthen the brand. Even internal brand marketing reaches outside the practice through things like patient giveaways and word of mouth:

From Chapter 7 here's our list of items to make sure you brand for internal marketing:

- Front desk signage
---
# Paperwork

- brochures, pads, new patient medical history
- Name tags for team members
- Pens
- TV screens
- Directional signage
- Hygiene bags (brand your practice not Colgate, Crest or other companies)
- Staff shirts and scrubs
- Patient giveaways
- Reappointment cards
- Treatment plans
- Emails to patients include a logo
- Texts to patients include a logo

Cross reference the Rebrand Checklist earlier in this chapter and remember the cycle we proposed. As you move around the circle; leverage branding into all other parts of the business. Each step of the brand cycle builds on the previous steps, and jumping ahead to try to get customers before building brand awareness is a recipe for high turnover and patients looking at your practice as a commodity rather than a destination:

# Branding Case Study

Dr: Craig Burhoop in Sioux City, Iowa is the owner of three practices. All three of his practices originally had different names, brands and websites. Dr: Burhoop and his wife Julie wanted to bring all three practices under one brand and website. The goal was to have a single name that could incorporate each individual practice's geographic location. Previously, their names each specified the areas of town they were located in: Lakeport, Hamilton and Elk Point.

When deciding on the practice name, they first settled on a simple approach of "The Dentist," followed by the distinct geographic location pertaining to each of the three practices. "The Dentist at Lakeport," "The Dentist at Hamilton," and "The Dentist at Elk Point" were the names that they arrived at. When creating the logo, they wanted to incorporate the landscape of the area, consisting predominantly of farmland and rolling hills. To incorporate all of these elements, an icon of the letter D that contained the farmland imagery and a tooth was created.

After the name, branding, and website were finalized and implemented, the website experienced an initial bump in traffic, but stalled between the second and third month. After reviewing website trends, including keywords, it was determined that the name "The Dentist" was too broad of a search term and ineffective at generating site traffic. Interestingly, this occurred even with the inclusion of "at Lakeport," "at Hamilton," and "at Elk Point" within the name. During this time, the website was getting around 4% online market share while the goal was set at 10%.
---
To remedy this issue, research was done to find a keyword that could be added to the name to localize it. After close research, the term "Siouxland" was found to have a high SEO value and held geographic significance as the name of the region. It was decided to add the term to the name, changing it to "The Dentist of Siouxland" then adding the "at" each location: The website domain, Google Business and content were updated accordingly, and within one month; the online market share increased to 7%. Eventually, after about three months, market share increased to 10%, finally meeting the initial goal.

The purpose of this case study is to demonstrate the positive impact rebranding can have on your brand as a whole. Remember when choosing a name and brand, that they do not negatively impact your online demand. It's not always necessary to have a local name, but you should be able to play off local terms as much as possible. This study also illustrates that if something is not working, you must pivot in order to find the best way forward:

We began this marketing book with branding; because the foundation of all marketing is branding as a whole. Without a defined brand, you won't be able to leverage any other marketing strategies. A strong brand has the potential to create value and connections with consumers lasting many years.

52
---
# Chapter 3

# Online Market Presence & SEO

After solidifying your brand, you'll need to consider your online presence. Using multiple channels to create an online presence is the quickest and most effective way to drive patients to your dental practice. The most common channels include your website, Facebook and other social media platforms, and your Google Business Profile, formerly known as Google My Business. We will address social media platforms later in the book and focus solely on websites and Google in this chapter:

|Finger Lakes Dental Care|Finger Lakes Dental Care|
|---|
|Address:|20 Finn Rd Suite E, Henrietta, NY 4467|
|Phone:|(585) 394-1930|
|Rating:|4.5|

Welcome to Finger Lakes Dental Care, a family practice that specializes in general, cosmetic, and implant dentistry, as well as sedation and orthodontics.

Your smile is the first thing people notice when they meet you. A healthy white smile leaves a lasting impression. Here at Finger Lakes Dental Care, we help you attain that healthy smile. Our services include general, cosmetic, and sedation dentistry.

# Google Business Profile

Your website is not only the most critical component of an online presence but the foundation for all of the additional outlets you choose to use. Website traffic directly correlates to conversions and new patients. Therefore, it is crucial that your website is built with expertise and best practices.
---
practices so it maximizes its value for your dental practice. This is often a learning point for many dentists that we work with.

A dentist may be well known in the local area and surrounding communities, which is an important aspect of driving initial awareness to their practice. However; this alone is not enough: Patients decide which dental practice to call home based on a combination of factors. A large component of this decision is the 'conversation' you have with them on your website: In fact; most patients, even if they have heard of your dental practice or the dentist; will double-check your website and read your Google reviews to ensure that they are making the right decision and feel confident about their choice.

We have evaluated hundreds of thousands of customer interactions, and we know all the intricacies that make websites successful. A good-looking website is great to have, but if it does not follow general best practices and does not convert potential patients for you it's essentially useless. When forming your website, the main objective is to build trust through transparency: Patients are looking for someone they can trust; and your website is the first step to building this potential trust. If you can provide a foundation for trust, your entire online presence will convert patients into actual patients. If not; then your website, while "looking nice" will not help your business grow:

# Website Investment

When putting together a quality website, there are many aspects to consider: Your practice's website is a key component of marketing and growing your practice, so do not be afraid to invest in a quality site.

The question often arises, "How much is too much and how much is too little?" Essentially; how do you define a quality website investment? Honestly, we have seen some dentists pay upwards of $50,000 for a 12-month contract to build a website, and others pay as low as $500. While $50,000 might give you a very pretty, unique site, we feel that this large of an investment is overkill. Websites like these can involve custom programming and nice images, but often lack some of the basic pieces that make your site appealing to Google's search algorithm. While it looks cool, these unique factors will slow down the site and make it actually less successful.

We've also seen instances where the cost for a $50,000 site is spread out over 12 months. These agreements usually don't end well, or the agency collects most of the value while your practice does not produce long-term results. Being locked into a long-term contract with an extremely high investment prevents your practice from ensuring results are maximized month-over-month:

Similarly, a very low investment; such as $500, could cause the opposite challenge. We often see these cheap websites as visually appealing, but bad in almost every other dimension.
---
company producing the websites is not doing all the appropriate location-based search engine optimization, then you are wasting your money, albeit at a slower pace At $500, we are very wary that someone is actually spending the time to make sure your website is unique to your practice and has all the appropriate geo-tags and optimization aspects that we would expect in any standard website. There are many components to a website that determine search engine ranking performance and each component has its own set of importance. If these components are not addressed individually but in a "rinse and repeat" fashion, it can hurt your ranking ability, or worse, end in penalties from search engines that can be hard to reverse.

# Common Question

# Question:

The website company I am talking with makes really visually appealing sites that are unique to my brand and clinic. They include video and lots of moving visuals that create a neat effect: Is it worth spending $20,000-850,000 over the course of a year or two on such a cool website?

# Answer:

No. Visually appealing websites typically are slower; rank lower on SEO, and make it more difficult for patients to find what they're looking for: We do not recommend spending higher amounts on aesthetic-looking websites due to these factors.

Since most dental clinics vary in size, there is no one-size-fits-all answer: In general, we suggest using a framework that is a percentage of your total revenues. We encourage you to try to keep your website costs between 1-3% of revenues, within the confines of a marketing spend that we recommend setting at 4.5-5% of revenues. This certainly does eat up a good portion of the budget. If your monthly revenues are $100,000, then you should be spending between $1,000-83,000 on your website and digital marketing each month: This budget may be even higher in a situation where you're attempting to grow the practice, in which case you’d want to spend possibly more than your target percentage just to get to a higher revenue level. However, there are also times when the competition in a given geographical market is lower than average, and you do not need to spend much to be the number one site in the area.

# Keys of a Great Website

Your website tells a story: It provides validation and content that connects a potential customer to you and hopefully helps the potential patient choose you: In order to create a quality website that tells this story, you should consider the user experience, SEO research and best practices, functionality, content, packaging, and transparency.

As you build your website, it's important to remember that all websites need continuous monitoring, nurturing, and evolution. Websites are not something that you set up and forget about: Search engine algorithms are continuously changing, and fresh content on a continual basis is important for reaching and maintaining high rankings in search results.
---
of digital media brings with it spam attacks and various dangers that can decrease the health of your site if not audited regularly: Most importantly, your competition is continually moving forward and you need to keep up.

As we stated in the last chapter; even if you have other external marketing, patients will still seek your website as the final lynchpin for choosing your practice. Every marketing tactic and avenue you choose will ultimately lead to someone visiting your website. Every time they do, you want them to experience a healthy, modernized site that has evolved along with time, not a site that is stuck in the past or that has not been maintained. Much like you update the physical building for your practice to maintain a good experience for your patients in-person, you should update your website to maintain a positive digital experience.

Patients will always consult your site seeking validity for their possible decision of you as their dentist. So remember:

- The purpose of your website is all about building trust through transparency:
- Show humanity and create ethos by sharing more about yourself.
- Include quality reviews, straightforward information about financing and services, and personal information about doctors.
- Encourage people to trust your services and offer many options for a 'call to action'.
- Ensure your site experience matches the natural progression of how consumers will recognize, form likeability, make a decision, and purchase as referenced in the branding section.

Overall, think of your website as the storefront of your business, because more traffic to your site results in more patients or production: There is a direct correlation between search results and brand awareness. So, ensure you are not only building your site as your ideal 'storefront' but also with an optimal user experience that is in direct agreement with Google and other search engine preferences.

To understand more of our philosophy on how to create a successful website, we have outlined the major steps in this chapter: First; we will address how to go about building a site from nothing; as even if you have a site, sometimes you will need to start all over again. The end of this chapter will review some of the most important pieces to consider as you analyze your current website and look for opportunities to incrementally improve and update.

# Starting from Scratch or a Redesign

If you are creating a new website from scratch, you are in an enviable position to make all the right decisions from the start. However; a redesign can also be a great way to energize your updated brand. As you begin with a new website, you can choose the right website domain, use the best photography, and set the site up for the best usability before you allow it to be seen publicly or by major search engines. To begin, here's a summary list of the steps to take when looking at your website:
---
# Choosing a Primary Domain

The brand work you completed earlier in this book will point you towards the best domain: The branding chapter of the book will have already allowed you to do market research; list your services, and understand your competition. After understanding those things, next up is the website address, or URL.

Finding the best website address, also known as a primary domain, is paramount to having a successful website and accelerated SEO. It can have a large impact on SEO and Google search performance. If you are moving through the branding cycle in the correct order; you will already have a brand established, at least on paper. While the brand should be established before choosing the website, finding the best URL address might even retroactively change which brand name you go with:

As you search for available URLs, we suggest GoDaddy.com or NameSilo.com as possible companies. Search their available options for available URL domains, and then ensure that you can lock that website URL in for a few years.

Clear and simple URL names are the best; and shorter is better: As you search for the name you want, consider geographic words added to the end to get the address you want: For example, if your dental clinic is named Rockslide Dental, and you are in Phoenix, then consider searching for Rockslidedentalphx.com, Rockslidedentalphoenix.com, or RockslidedentalAZ.com: Any of these names will actually help SEO with having Phoenix or AZ in the name.

In the case where your favorite URL is taken, we suggest using the word 'my' in front of the URL to possibly create a new and unique URL that might not be taken. The Disney corporation started doing this for its products a few years ago, and it has worked well for many of us across the country to get the best domain name. As users look for and use a domain with the word 'my' in it, they also subconsciously take more ownership of their decision to use you, leading to more brand loyalty:

When choosing a domain name URL, you will want to always go with .com. This is called the top-level domain, and you will not want to stray from the .com domain: There is the possibility.
---
# Quick Recap

1. Choose a com domain
2. Choose short, clear, and simple URL
3. Having city in the name helps SEO
4. Consider adding 'my' on the front end of the URL

# Learning how Consumers Talk about your Services

Once we get into dental school, we are taught the "correct" scientific name for many anatomical structures, pathologies, and procedures. However, the minute we leave school we need to remember that we are dealing with the rest of the population that is unfamiliar with these terms. Where we know 'caries', they know 'cavities'. Where we know 'all-ceramic crown', they know 'cap'. In this way, we need to reprogram our minds and use the verbiage that our consumers use to better cater our website to our target audience.

One useful tool is Google Trends (trends-google com): This tool allows you to search for terms by date and geography in order to see what terms you will most likely want to use as you write content and pages for your website.

Here is an example for 'Emergency Dental' versus 'Tooth Pain'. In this example; whereas we might think that we should focus on the word emergency, it is actually searched less than 50% as compared to 'tooth pain'.
---
# Emergency Dental

# Tooth Pain

# Add Comparison

Search term: United States

Past 12 months: All categories

Web Search

# Interest Over Time

Xenjje: 3 M

As you or your website company begins to build out content for pages, make sure to check Google Trends for your state and local zip codes to make sure you are using the correct verbiage.

# Optimizing Functionality

Many websites can look "cool", but the functions and flow of the site can be horrible. A website that focuses solely on aesthetics, colors, and imagery will not result in search engine rankings or conversions to become actual patients. Remember; that the goal of any site is to create a quality user experience that is defined from your practice offerings, leads to the desired experience from the user; and adheres to the best practices from search engines, especially Google. Your site should be friendly for both mobile and desktop computers: It should also be easy to navigate to someone who enters your website for the first time. This content should be direct and easy to understand. You have about five seconds for a user to scan your site to recognize who you are and determine likeability, so the correct use of words, headings, banners, and call-to-action buttons are critical.

We know from research that one of the major driving factors of likeability is the doctor. In the last five years, trust factors across the market have slipped across all industries, but especially medicine and science. Potential clients, or patients, are skeptical and no longer provide blind trust to a brand. For this reason, potential new patients will go to the "About Us" page to read about the doctors to see if they like the doctors and feel they match with the practice. In fact, the usage of the traditional "About Us" page on most sites has climbed in traffic almost 80 percent. This page used to be an afterthought; even thrown in the footer-section, because it had minimal importance. However, this is no longer the case. Transparency and building a personal relationship for a foundation of trust is critical to an optimized website and user experience. This trend and insight is the reason why we always recommend creating a "Meet the Doctor" page.
---
and to have this page be visible in top navigation and on the homepage with a direct call-to-action.

In this same train of thought; there is also an increase of distrust among the marketplace around fees and billing: For this reason, financial information is the second most clicked navigation on a dental practice website. The reason for this is people want to see transparency to build trust. If you are willing to be transparent with your financial offerings and payment plans, as well as your dental office fees, it goes a very long way to building trust and visibility. Additionally, there are a rising number of Americans who do not have insurance and prefer to have simple payment options. Laying out your costs and office fees provides them a reference point for out-of-pocket costs and also similarly demonstrates integrity: Even if your office fees are higher than your competitors, making them available for new and existing patients elevates the trust factor and the likelihood they will choose you over your competition.

In order of most visited pages across the hundreds of thousands of customer interactions, we have found these to be the highest priority:

1. About Us (Doctor page)
2. Financial
3. Service pages for the primary services the doctor offers

Trust is a large factor that leads to conversions in what we consider a "decision funnel". These are very different from your typical marketing funnels with emails, Facebook Ads, and gimmicks. Rather; these funnels are calculated based upon data that allows you to incorporate the optimal click strategy into your website. This is the experience that will lead to increased conversions for your practice.

In the example below from Google Analytics for a website, you can see where website users go in their clicking through of your site. In this way, you can see where you need to highlight the buttons and information to avoid the exit of the consumer from the website.
---
# Landing Page

# Starting pages

|Ist Interaction|58K sessions, 4K drop-offs|14K sessions; 5.7K drop-offs|
|---|---|---|
|21K|29K|laboutl|
|2.6k|lfinanciall|1.4K|
|Iservicesl|1.2k|11K|
|laboutlpati. dom-teethl|T1K|laboutidoct. hapek-dds/|
|I5-laughing_ ot-joking/|2K|Ifinanciall fice-feesi|
|1.1K|Iservicesid_ ~~implants/|3.4k|
|1.7K|I5-laughing ot-joking/|laboulldoct_n-killeen/|
|1.5k|Iservicesld. ~~implants/|1.7K|
|22k|(100 more pages)|12k|

More simply; offering users the information they want; in the order they want; builds trust with a higher velocity: This is what we consider the "decision funnel;" which helps to answer the next question that the potential client wants to ask. Using this philosophy; we can follow the visitors' natural questions, and give them the appropriate answers to funnel them into the pages that they most likely want to see. In product marketing this would be the button known as "Buy Now" on many websites, but in dentistry; our goal should be the "Schedule Now" button. Using this system, we can increase the chances that a given visitor on your website will choose your office as their next dental home.

# Choosing Service Pages

In any dental website, or even a general website, there are a few 'content' pages that are going to showcase the major services, products, or items you want to highlight: In dental, that is what we commonly call our services pages. These pages will focus on the top 8-12 services that your practice excels in, or the top services that potential customers in your area might be targeting with their online searches.

Sometimes these might also be services that you do not perform frequently right now, but they are a focus for you in the future. Maybe you really love placing implants and you want to move into the full-mouth fixed prosthesis - "All-On-X." In this case, even though you do not do them frequently; or yet; you will want to include this as a service page so that potential patients are exposed to the fact that you can perform that procedure for them:
---
# Dental Services

- White Fillings
- Crowns
- Same-Day Crowns
- Dental Veneers
- Emergency Dentistry
- Sealants
- Mouth Guards
- Invisalign
- Tooth Extractions
- Dental Implants
- Dentures
- Teeth Whitening
- Root Canal Treatment
- Wisdom Teeth Removal
- Periodontal Disease Treatment
- Laser Cold Sore Treatments
- Sleep Apnea
- Pediatric Crowns
- Sedation Dentistry

Above is a list of possible services to add, but is absolutely not definitive or complete. You may find other services that you think match your practice better; or ones that match what your patient population is looking for:

After picking the topics for your service pages, you will want to pack these pages with the most relevant and important information for patients. Think of these pages as your chance to have a consultation with the patient, explaining all the risks, benefits, costs and alternatives. It is also important to make sure to explain these items in a natural flow, so that it answers the next question that the patient is going to ask.

It will be important to not overwhelm the page with more information than needed. Simplicity is key here. Overly wordy text; or too many pictures, can be off-putting to potential patients and might not do well for your search engine optimization. Much like all things, the simpler you can make it; the better.

It will also be important throughout these service pages to build up authority of why the doctor or practice has expertise in the area that is being discussed. Giving the opportunity from this page to learn more about the doctor is always a good idea, as well as giving the 'Schedule Now' button, to present the option of making the buying decision at that moment.
---
# Designing the Visuals of Your Website

Remember that your website is very much an aspect of your brand experience, and the website is an extension of your physical office. Colors and fonts should match your other marketing materials as well as your internal decor:

# Your Trusted Fedntric Deutist in Lincoln NE

If your office is pediatric and kid-friendly; then your colors will be bright; with fun imagery that matches a pediatric atmosphere in the office. However; if you are in New York City and focused solely on esthetic cases, then your site will include more black, whites, grays, and gold colors to accentuate that you are a high-end cosmetic dentist.

Additionally, showcase your team and office with professional photographs. Do not use stock photography for anything on your website. Photographs like this are used in so many websites, and Google's search algorithm knows this. They will decrease your SEO if they see photographs that are replicated.

Another important aspect of design that is often forgotten is ADA Compliance. We discuss ADA compliance in more detail in the next chapter; but it's important to note that this is not only a large aspect of optimization and visibility but of building a trust factor through the idea that your website and brand experience is all-encompassing for the local community:

ADA compliance is short for the American Disabilities Act Standards for Accessible Design. This means all electronic information must be accessible for those with disabilities, which is a critical.
---
component to your website and an important consideration for your brand design and experience.

# Considering Photography

When considering photography, it's always best to use custom photo of yourself and your practice. Stock photography is available to anyone with a subscription and often looks posed. If you opt for stock photography you may end up with the same photos representing your brand as your competitors, or a less unique feel to your branding that negatively impacts the uniqueness and transparency of your website. Unique photography does quite the opposite, and the gains are not just the feel from the website, but an accelerated trust and response from new and existing patients. While a good photographer might be an investment of $500-$1,000 per photo shoot, it's absolutely worth it to have the best photographs of the practice and the people who work in it so you can get the best possible response.

It's important to mention that high quality artistic photography does not mean that the overall site has to be fancy or totally custom-coded. A great user experience provides the value it needs, while the photography contributes to the overall design and feel. We have seen many sites that aesthetically look very unique, but the user experience is quite poor; leading to poor return-on-investment: Our approach brings balance and best practice to both design and user experience.

As you approach setting up a good online presence, one of the first steps is to find a good local photographer (i.e., check work history) and have them take and edit 40-50 pictures in the following list:

1. both individual and group of doctors
2. Headshots
3. Possible headshots for staff if you wish to include them on your website
4. Office Photos: clean office photography of waiting room, operatory, exterior; and other interesting photos around the office
- Either an exterior or interior photo can be used as the 'Hero' photo on the website, otherwise use the doctor headshots in the slightly larger format
5. Candid Shots
- Walking down the hallway with different groups of doctors and team
- Walking down the hallway with doctor and patient
- Sitting in operatory with doctor and patient
- Doctor consulting with patient over computer screen (office setting) or in chair with iPad
---
# Welcoming a patient to the practice at the front desk

Go to the Document Vault for a PDF Guide on Photoshoots

The next few pages summarize some of the best notes we give to photographers as they work with us in taking photos for dentists. It is important to send very detailed notes and a checklist of photographs you want prior to their visit. It can be costly and annoying to forget an important picture and have to bring the photographer back later for another photo shoot.
---
# P H 0 TO $ H 0 0 T

# G U | D E

# MYC MoshA R E. € 0 M

# H E A D $H 0 T $:

b e n i n d tn e  $ € e n e $

- Ligh-subjec-with natural window lizht
- No flash
- Pose -hem like Dr: K totherieh:
- Have them smile
- Review to ensure they look happy
- Make sure they are in Focus
- If possible photographer should be positioned a bit above the subject
- (notice how the photographer on the right is a few inches off the ground by use of step stool)

# fini s h e d Prod u € t

66
---
# GALLERY EXAMPLE

# HEADSHOT

MY C MoshA R E. € 0 M

PLEASE NOTE:

Headshots work best for us when the body is not cut off on the left or right sides at all. They also work best if you can shoot a few of them in landscape view with enough white or background space on each side so we are able to use them in the "HERO" spots on the website's homepage.

67
---
# P H 0 TO $ H 0 0 T G U |D E

# MY C MoshA RE.€ 0 M

# C A ND I D S hoT $:

finish e d pro d  € t

Try to fnd n a tura lient but OK if tne rcom dcesn - allow

Take interior and extericr front door

Copv ` followine tne exac-posesontne gallery page to imitate candid look

Have them smile

Review to ensure they look happy

Make sure they are in focus

Clear background of all clutter

- Computer {TV screens off
- If screen is part of picture make sure it is not the schedule or HIPAA on it
- No loose papers
- You will have to stage the area to make it appear super clean which may not be its natural look
- Remove cords
- Remove anysupoles boxes etc

Study eallery page to notice how the backercunds look more like a TV set than a usable ofhce

68
---
# GALLERY EXAMPLES

# CANDID

MY C MoshAR E. C 0 M

69
---
# Utilizing Privacy Policies

Privacy policies are a key component of a website and set you up for safety, trust, and success with future advertising and outreach efforts. Your policies should be visible, straightforward, and transparent: Let your visitors know the data you are gathering, why you're gathering it, and how it could be used. If you're unsure if your policy is correct, consult your attorney and take ideas from other websites' policies.

While most people simply click through these policies, you will need to have them clearly visible and straightforward.
---
# Conduct a Thorough Quality Assurance Audit

Once you have all your pages built on a test website, make sure to check each page before it goes live. You will want to spell-check all text; make sure pictures are formatted for both mobile and desktop versions of the site, and check to make sure pictures are the best possible match for your content:

During this final check of the website, it might take a few hours to quickly review everything, but we have seen so many errors that can occur during the creation of a site. During this process, check both the visible text, as well as any 'meta-data' which is not visible to the eye, but sits on the back-end of the site and gives search engines the relevant data about your business.

In one horror story, a dentist found out that their SEO was putting their practice in a state over 2,500 miles away: Their web developer had copy and pasted a website from another dentist; and although the visible text was updated, all the meta-data was not. This meta-data, used by Google and Facebook; had the practice in a different state, with a different doctor: This led to many calls and after-hours calls that were for the completely wrong practice. After 12 months of using this website company; the company remained oblivious to the incorrect meta-data until the dental practice discovered this mistake on their own.

# Maintaining and Refreshing Content

Remember to update content frequently, as many search engines regularly scan the site for updated changes and rewards sites that are updated frequently: For this content; you will want to focus on the topics that are important to the end user; all the while paying detailed attention to SEO components and the evolution of the client experience. This could mean that you're using important keywords from the biggest items that your customers are searching: To work through this, begin by asking the questions that a typical patient would ask, and go about answering those questions. It's recommended this content is updated weekly or monthly, and is put into 'Blog' sections.

The final large piece of the website puzzle is to ensure that you have a thorough, updated listing of the services that you offer: When describing these services, make sure that you actually perform them, and that you describe them in a way that sounds inviting and professional. As you grow as a clinician and practice, you will add amazing services, so make sure to highlight these on your website.

# Analyzing your Current Website

For many dental clinics, you already have a website, but you may be questioning how well it is performing for you: Below is a checklist that we use to help identify if there are deficiencies in your web presence. Use this as a way to analyze if there are things you need to work on with your current site, or things to make sure a marketing firm uses in developing your new website.
---
Ensure your website has the basic necessities needed to give your potential new patients the experience they are seeking: Easy user experience with exceptional SEO increases conversion rates;

|Yes|No|Unsure|
|---|---|---|
|Do you have Google Analytics set up?| | |
|Do you have conversion tracking or goals set up through Google Analytics?| | |
|Is your SFO actively worked on?| | |
|Do you have a Google PPC campaign running?| | |
|Is 75% or more of your traffic coming from local users?| | |
|Is your website built with user experience in mind to convert users?| | |
|Are you analyzing your website numbers and conversion rates?| | |
|Do you know your market share of organic traffic and keywords?| | |
|Is your website on a Wordpress platform?| | |
|Do you have a Meet the Doctor page?| | |
|Do you have a Financial page with insurance and/or savings plans listed?| | |
|Do you have an Office Fees page?| | |
|Do you have individual pages for each service?| | |
|Do you have call to action buttons?| | |
|Do you have online scheduling?| | |
|Does your website include a link to Google Maps and Google My Business?| | |
|Do you have a section for displaying Google Reviews on your website?| | |
|Are you using professional photos of the office and doctor(s) and not stock photos?| | |
|Are your photos and videos optimized for size and load speed?| | |
|Is your website mobile friendly?| | |

12-16 "yes" Middle Performer total:

17-20 "yes" High Performer

"yes" Low Performer

Better User Experience Better SEO. Better SEO More Traffic; More Traffic More Production,

As you go through some of these questions and read this book, you will gain a better understanding of why these questions are asked. Many of these questions pertain to web presence, but they also discuss online paid advertising as well. We will discuss all of the rest of the issues in the next few chapters and further explain how to transition your practice into the "High Performer" category:

72
---
# Google Analytics

Google Analytics (GA) tracks just about every interaction on your website and provides in-depth insights about your site's performance. This will be important to add into your website from the first day it goes live. Google Analytics is a piece of code placed on each page of the website that tracks a user's visits and time throughout the website. This serves as the main source of information about how users interact with your site and will give you a lot of information that you could not find anywhere else.

Your web hosting company should set this up; however, it is actually quite easy to set up on your own. If you have chosen to set up Google Analytics yourself, first go to analytics.google.com and create an account. Once logged in, you will see the admin dashboard where you are able to input your web domain, account, geography, and other details about your website and business. After completing that, you will receive a unique tracking ID. You can then enter this ID into services like Squarespace or, if you are a capable programmer, paste the ID in using code.

# GA tracks many metrics about the website, but the few data pieces are:

- Users
- Sessions
- Bounce rate
- Session duration
- Traffic sources

# Understanding these interactions helps you measure success, identify areas of opportunity, and discover ways to enhance the user experience. We recommend closely tracking the following KPIs for your website:

Local web traffic. Local web visitors are much more qualified traffic than individuals in further proximity from your practice. Visitors from another state likely will not travel for a dentist, so it's important to keep a focus on your local traffic. Increases in local web traffic almost always.

# ADMIN

|Property|Create Property|Tracking ID|Status|
|---|---|---|---|
| | |UA-1608477|Receiving traffic in past 48 hours|

# GA4 Setup Assistant

Active users right now: See details in real-time traffic reports

Send test traffic

# Property Settings

Property Access

Website Tracking

Global Site Tag (gtag.js)

# Tracking Info

This is the Global Site Tag (gtag.js) tracking code for this property: Copy and paste this code as the first:

If you already have a Global Site Tag on your page, simply add the config line from the snippet below to:

# Tracking Code

&lt;!-- Global site tag (gtag.js) - Google Analytics --&gt;
&lt;script async src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=UA-1608477"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;
&lt;script&gt;
window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || [];
function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);}
gtag('js', new Date());
&lt;/script&gt;

# Data Collection

# Data Retention

# User-ID

# Session Settings

# Organic Search Sources

# Referral Exclusion List
---
Lead to increased conversions on your site, consequently boosting your new patient and production numbers. We have seen websites that gain a lot of traffic, but from another state or country: If site traffic isn't local, it has little value.

# Number of conversions

(phone calls, appointments scheduled online, and form submissions). Your online conversions are concrete values to show how many people completed the call-to-actions that your website was designed for: Google Analytics will track 'conversions' by reporting whether someone clicked a phone number or scheduling link.

# Traffic sources

Knowing where your traffic is coming from will help you see how well digital efforts are working: Determine how much traffic you're getting from organic search, Google Ads, Facebook Ads, or any other referral source.

These are just a few of the key metrics you can track using Google Analytics to measure success. We dig deeper into conversion rates and measuring overall success as it relates to your ROI in Chapter 10.

# Google Business Profile

The second large piece to your online presence is your practice's Google Business Profile (GBP: Google Business Profile, formerly Google My Business) introduces patients to your business but does not replace your site. GBP simply displays your business page in search results when someone searches for a dentist; or on Google Maps when someone searches for 'dentist near me'. This is extremely important because your GBP includes the main information related to your practice, including a link to your website, phone number, address, hours, and services offered.

# Health & safety

Appointment required. Mask required. Temperature check required. Staff wear masks. Staff get temperature checks. Staff required to disinfect surfaces between visits.

# Details

Address: 5609 3 27th St Lincoln, NE 68512

Phone: (402) 420-0999

Website: mycapitaldental.com

Appointments: flexbook.me

# Products and Services

In order to fully maximize your GBP, you'll need to sign up and manage your profile. This includes making sure your pictures and office information are accurate and up-to-date. One of the key features of GBP is its prominent display of Google Reviews. This enhances SEO and gives potential patients a chance to see 'social proof' before they decide to call or schedule at your practice.

In general, GBP has many more views than any other part of your website, or even your Facebook page. These visitors are also more qualified, meaning they are looking for exactly what you are selling: This fact alone makes your GBP quite possibly the most valuable web interface you have for the practice. In order to maximize the interactions and data on this page, we want to go through a quick list of items you should optimize for your practice's GBP:

- Verify office name, website, address and phone number are accurate.
- Ensure correct hours of operation, including holidays.
---
# Building Your Google Business Profile (GBP)

Include a link to your online scheduling. Display all applicable services are detailed here as Products. Add professional photos to ensure that people see high-quality photos of your practice. Feature doctors of the practice in the primary photo. Include cost ranges of your services in the 'Product' area. Avoid using tracking numbers. Remember that current patients will use this to contact you, so a tracking phone number here is not always worth using (use your regular phone number instead): Respond to reviews frequently.

# Images to Help You Build Your GBP

Below are images to help you build your GBP to maximize visibility and promote user-friendly features.

# Reviews from the Web

|Explore categories|Cacra Cental|Facecook|
|---|---|---|
|4.9/5|5/5| |
|Dental Care|Dental Surgery|896 votes|
|Aesthetic Dentistry|Membership Plans|44 Reviews|
|Edit your review|Add photo| |

# Customer Feedback

"Friendly Staff, great service, beautiful office."

"Very reasonable on pricing and they don't push for extra services ever. Better group to work with for dental care!"

# Questions & Answers

See all questions (1) Ask question

# Popular Times

|MON|TUE|WED|THU|FRI|SAT|SUN|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2 PM: Usually a little busy| | | | | | |

# Customer Experience

People typically spend 25 min to 1 hr here.

# Updates from Capital Dental

Capital Dental offers affordable dental care in Lincoln, NE with an emphasis on patient comfort. Our specialties include dental implants, tooth extractions, sedation dentistry, and cold sore treatments. Visit our website to learn more about our services.

# Additional Information

People also search for:

View 15 more
---
# Products Page on GBP

We recommend that you include this in your profile, mostly because it helps Google to rank your clinic higher: Including a Products page provides more information about the services your practice offers, thereby better addressing the wants and needs of your current and future patients.

In general, you pick the categories of products, and then create a product in that category with a specified price range: In many clinics, we recommend the following Products and Categories:

# Recommended Products and Categories

- Dental Care: Bridges, White Fillings, Crowns, Implant Crowns, Esthetic Fillings
- Dental Surgery: Implants, Sedation, Extractions, Wisdom Tooth Extractions
- Aesthetic Dentistry: White Fillings, Veneers, Crowns, Tooth Whitening, Invisalign
- Membership Plans (if applicable): Child, Adult, Periodontal

# Product Details

|Dental Care|Implant Crowns|Bridges|Esthetic Fillings|Affordable Payment Plan|Price Range|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Dental Surgery|Teeth Removal|Patient 3D X-ray|Price| | |
| |51,500.00|5,000.00| | | |

Each service should have an image, description, and price range. Appropriately keep the description short, but also detailed enough to allow the user to see exactly which services you offer:

# Quick Recap

Google Business Profile will have more visibility than your website, ensure that you have correct, timely, and valuable information on that profile:

- Make sure to connect online scheduling if you offer it.
- Add Products and Services to the profile to increase visibility.
---
# Reviews

One of the best ways to increase overall visibility is to increase Google Reviews. To receive more Google Reviews, go to your GBP page > Home > and look for the button that states "Share Review Form". Use this Link-URL to then share with patients via text messages, emails, or have it on a QR code printed up in the office so that patients can write a review immediately in the office.

Increasing the number of reviews in the office should also be a major focus of your internal marketing: This should be a two-part approach. The first piece is to make sure that you are using some scripting to request reviews in the office. One example is when a patient says, "Thank you" to a team member towards the end of the appointment: In this instance, you can train the team member to respond with, "You're welcome, and you know one of the best ways you could thank us would be by giving us a Google Review: You will get a text tonight with a link, and if you could write a review that would mean the world to us." This reinforces that they will get a text later tonight and that the reviews are actually meaningful to the practice. Scripting like this can increase your reviews by a significant percentage.

There are some digital solutions to generating more Google Reviews. Usually many web services include this text or email option within the service. Our top two are Flex and Swell CX. Flex Dental sends an automated text going out at a set time after the appointment: This function is built into the software, alongside the many other features of the software including follow-up texts and emails, post-op forms, digital paperwork, and online scheduling. Swell CX is an entire product based around generating more reviews and has automated texts that go out to patients the evening after their appointment; as well as a few days after: A trackable link is used so that if a patient does not click the link, they will be reminded to do so at a later point in time.

# Here is a picture of what Swell CX gives you for reporting:

|Public Review Score|Review Sites Overview|
|---|---|
|4.9|1.8% from last month|
|Google|#1054|
|4.93|1054 total reviews|
|This month (4)|5.0|
|Last month (23)|49|
|This year (80)|49|
|#Total reviews|Avg Score (0-5)|
|77| |
---
# Google Review Invite - Capital Dental

# Campaign Metrics

|CAPITAL DENTAL|Invites Sent|Open Rate (3288 invites opened)|Clicked to Review Site|
|---|---|---|---|
|7981|39%|41%| |

# Preview SMS

# Preview Email

In general, Google Business Profile, including Google Reviews; is one of the first things you will need to set up after you have a website. Even after setting up GBP; it is also important to perform a routine check of the platform to ensure that data is correct and the page is still serving you adequately: To achieve this successfully, we recommend adding it to a checklist to complete every month for either the Marketing Manager or CEO of the practice.

# Common Question

Question: I have a high amount of Google Reviews but they seem to be disappearing off my Google Business Profile. Does Google delete reviews?

Answer: Google will delete reviews every once in a while if they think that the reviews are fake, malicious, or for any other reason that is unknown to the general public. Google states, "Reviews might be removed for policy violations like spam or inappropriate content." In another occurrence, sometimes patients will create Google accounts to write a review; but then they do not go back to their profile for a long time. In this instance, Google sees that the reviewer might have been a fake account, and so they will delete these reviews.

The web presence of the practice is the primary place for a new or existing patient to verify that you have the authority to solve their problem: Make sure that you invest ample time and energy into ensuring your website and online platforms answer all these questions to a high degree in order to turn potential new patients into lifelong patients.
---
# Chapter 4

# Search Engine Optimization

Search Engine Optimization (SEO) is helping to make sure Google, Bing, and other search engines find your site and show it to your potential patients. There are many aspects related to SEO that determine your site search rankings and visibility across major search engines, many of which change over time. In a most basic sense, SEO could be described as trying to help find the best answers to the questions that consumers are asking: As dentists, our goal in SEO is to have that answer and offer it in the most friendly way.

SEO has many differing strategies, and each of those strategies evolve on a monthly basis—impacting site structure, design, content, speed, and development of your website. This is why we always recommend SEO be managed on a weekly and monthly basis. Doing SEO optimization less often limits success. In this era of the internet, launching a site only to leave it unattended from a SEO-content perspective causes the website to slip off the search radar of major companies.

A great way to think of SEO is that it is building your credibility and digital network. Just like your personal network is something that you continuously work to build, SEO does the same thing in the digital atmosphere because it increases your credibility, reputation, and expertise in the marketplace.

A word of warning before we dig through the details of SEO in this chapter: this chapter digs deep into the current science, and art, of SEO. While you might not be the engineer carrying out these functions on your site, we thought it prudent to include all this information to be as thorough as possible. It is also helpful to remember that this book is not the sole authoritative material on SEO, especially in today's world where digital media changes quite often. However, understanding of the industry; we will equip you with the most important information on SEO for dental marketing.

Here are the factors that play a significant role in SEO for your site:
---
# 1. Usability & User Experience

# 2. Online authority

- a. Navigation
- b. Content
- c. Mobile Friendliness
- d. Page Speed
- e. Americans with Disabilities Act
- f. Search Engine Accessibility

# 3. On-site Optimization

- a. Keywords
- b. Image Optimization
- c. URL Structure
- d. Redirects
- e. Canonical Tags
- f. Structured Data

The diagram below illustrates these three overarching SEO factors and the pieces that fall within each.

|Experience|Navigation|Keywords|Image Optimization|
|---|---|---|---|
|Content|Mobile Friendliness|Page Speed|SEO|
|Americans with Disabilities Act|Search Engine Optimizer|Redirects|Canonical Tags|
|Search Engine Accessibility|Link Profile|Online Listings|Social Media|
|Online Authority|Online Authority|Online Authority|Online Authority|
---
# Usability & User Experience

Website usability encompasses every aspect of your website, from development to design, and down to the ability of search engines to find and process your site. Higher search results rankings are largely dependent on good website usability, so creating a user-friendly website should be the foundation of your strategy to build or update your site.

Good usability means your website is accessible and easily understood by all users and search engines. Establishing good usability, or implementing relevant enhancements, starts with understanding how users are searching and what users are searching for:

In our dental field, this usually means knowing what potential patients are looking for; and helping them find that information easily and quickly. User experience is also all about how these potential customers perceive the website's usability and aesthetics. Create your site's experience based on how your patients need information, not how we, as doctors, understand the information. Let's explore some of the key user experience elements.

# Navigation

Navigation is one of the key components of any website. Good navigation is structured in a simple, easy format so users don't have to think very hard to flow through your website or find the information they seek. A good rule of thumb when creating navigation is that people should be able to land anywhere on your site and find what they need in 3 clicks.

Correlate your site's primary navigation to the two or three most important aspects of your practice. In other words, what are the most common questions patients want answers to when determining where to go for their dental needs? These answers should be the top-level navigation and the most prominent callouts on your website. These components also determine the order of content and how it's structured on your site, such as what information is important enough to be featured on the homepage.

Below is an example of the top-level navigation for a multi-location group:

ABOUT
DoctoRS
SERVICES
FINANCIAL
BLOG
LOCATIONS

Secondly, your website navigation experience should mimic a typical conversation you have with a potential new patient or existing patient: Think about the questions you hear most - the top reasons why patients choose you over your competition. Most of the time it will include the doctors, services, or insurances that the practice participates with. Then, think about how the conversation extends from that point: For example, do they often want to learn about the dentist first and from there the rest of the staff? Do they often ask about a certain service and immediately want to know how much it costs? Let these conversations and natural interactions dictate the flow of your navigation, where you place links, and where you insert call-to-actions.
---
We also suggest that you go through each specific page of your site, while continuing to think about the next question the consumer will ask, and design accordingly: Below is an example of the bottom of a service-specific page, which then gives more options for visitors to learn more.

# More questions?

If you have more questions about tooth fillings and sealants, please contact our office and we will be happy to discuss further:

- Contact Capital Dental Lincoln
- View All Dental Services
- View Office Fees

Your website's navigation structure can have a huge impact on conversions and web traffic, directly affecting your brand awareness and the number of patients walking through your door: If patients can't easily find an answer to their question or quickly know how to schedule an appointment or call your office - they'll find a website where they can.

Best practice for positioning navigation is at the top of your website. Navigation should be designed in such a way that the most important things are easy to find. Don't mix different types of navigation: Many times a site will have top navigation and sidebar navigation on the homepage or other pages. This confuses the user: Use top navigation and build it in a way that works to easily direct the user to pages they want to view and information they seek.

Be consistent in voice, headline treatments, modules, and call-to-action buttons. You want the user to learn the functions of your site in a few short seconds and easily pick up on what's a link, what's an icon, what's an image, etc. Using the same color treatments for call-to-actions, the same background for images, the same background elements, etc. helps reinforce a quick learning experience and ease of usability: Many templates in Squarespace or Wix will hard-code these items in, but this is crucial information to remember for if you choose to work without a pre-designed template.

Ensure the most important conversions ("Click here to Schedule Online") are visible on every page of your website and called out so the user can easily find them: These should be at the top of every page and clickable so users can directly call, schedule an appointment, or submit an inquiry.

When building a user experience, it's not just about the user; it's also about search engines. Specifically Google. Google mimics its algorithms after user behavior; so the easier you make it for a user to learn the navigation, quickly understand what you offer, and get answers to their questions without getting lost, the higher Google will catapult you in the search rankings.

82
---
# Content

One of the largest and time-consuming components of any site is the content. Content is king when it comes to generating higher rankings in search results, ultimately leading to more web traffic to your site. Content quality, and ranking for that content, is evaluated on three primary components: expertise, authoritativeness, and trustworthiness commonly referred to as the EAT principle. Search engines have one goal, to provide users with information they're looking for: So, ensuring the information they provide is accurate and truthful is a top priority.

Establish expertise, authority, and trustworthiness throughout your website to ensure that both patients and search engines trust you. Search engines know that the information people get online can directly affect their decisions, and when it comes to dental, those decisions can directly affect someone's health. If you present content that's in any way deceptive or inaccurate, your rankings will be negatively affected.

# Follow these guidelines for optimized content:

1. Be accurate, concise, and truthful.
2. Include targeted keywords.
3. Ensure content is unique and not duplicated.
4. Make it user-friendly, easily readable, and well-organized.
5. Include images or videos to supplement text-based content.
6. Include location information when applicable: name of city or neighborhood.
7. Update content regularly.

Gone are the days of presenting in a fun, creative fashion to be unique and different. Now, it's all about ease of understanding and credibility. Be direct and honest with your content and don't make the user figure it out. Cleverness in marketing content has a time and a place, but with the increase of attention around digital efforts, the venues for clever and creative writing are diminishing in their effectiveness.

# How do you know what people are searching for to master the EAT principle?

Keyword research: Although we described some keywords in the previous chapter using Google Trends, this chapter delves much deeper into keyword use in SEO. Keyword research is the first step in mastering your SEO efforts. How you talk about a service or product is likely different from how a user is searching for that topic. Due to this difference, knowing the terms and words that the marketplace uses while searching online is critical. The goal is to ensure your website uses terms in the correct way so search engines can match your website content to these searches.

As search has become more popular and search engines have evolved, users now look for information in what Google deems "long-tail key phrases," which is a fancy way of saying specific key terms. Searching with just one or two-word phrases is no longer the most popular type of search. As search engines have become more relevant, people are searching with phrases, not terms. For example, if someone was looking for teeth whitening services, they wouldn't only...
---
search for teeth_whitening but rather something like: teeth_wbitening_services near me: The former is a key term search, while the latter is a longtail keyphrase search. When identifying the terms, or phrases, that people are searching for; dont only take into account the term or phrase itself. Also consider the frequency of searches, and their ranking difficulty: From here, you can understand the landscape of your target audience and how challenging it could be to rank for a certain topic.

# Important Point

Similar to the movie Moneyball with Brad Pitt; you are looking for bunts and singles, rather than home runs. Trying to hit a home run' is like trying to get the #1-3 ranking spots on "dentist your city." This is extremely difficult and will take years to achieve; if even possible: However; you can gain the #1-3 spots in smaller long tail keyphrases much easier if you do your research and focus on those phrases that are more achievable. With this strategy; you can amass more high-ranking searches among smaller search terms which can actually lead to a larger market share than if you were to just be #1 along one major search term:

When selecting keywords, its always best to use keywords with high search volume and low ranking difficulty: Commonly, the highest-searched keywords are also those with the highest ranking difficulty so its all about finding the balance between volume and difficulty: In more general terms, do you want to play a tough game and go for the "dentist San Diego"? There are likely 2,000 other dentists looking to optimize for this key phrase, so it is wise to pick a smaller niche of a keyword and attack that phrase. If you picked a smaller keyphrase, like a neighborhood or more detailed procedure ("laser cold sore removal San Diego"), you might only be competing against 20 practices, rather than 2,000. Choose the keyword phrases that you are going to try to achieve success in.

Keyword research can be completed through various online SEO tools, such as SEMRush Keyword Magic Tool, or Moz Keyword Explorer: Using these tools is simple, all you have to do is enter the keyword or phrase of interest and a variety of results display, depending on which tool you're using: Each of these tools show universal results including search volume, ranking difficulty, and related keyphrases but they also each come with unique features to enhance your keyword research. See examples of each tool below:

84
---
# SEMRUSH

# Keyword Magic Tool: dentist near me

Database: United States   Currency: USD

|Keyword|Intent|Volume|KD %|CPC (USD)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|accept|1,613|1,220,000|91|9.16|
|take|1,178|135,000|92|9.16|
|medical|766|110,000|53|6.25|
|open|642|90,500|66|4.73|
|best|633|40,500|78|9.08|

Keyword research results for the query of 'dentist near me' showing volume, trends, and difficulty from SEMRush Keyword Magic Tool. A key benefit of SEMRush is the advanced filter functionality: Each option at the top lets you filter by just about any field, making it easy to find the precise results around your entered keyphrase. Get results based on match type (broad, phrase, exact; or related), search volume, difficulty; and more.
---
# Keyword Research

# Explore by Keyword

dentist near me

United States en-US

# Keyword Overview

Keyword Suggestions of 10 queries available until 04/30

# SERP Analysis

# Keyword Lists SAMPLE

|Keyword|Monthly Volume|Rank Title & URL|PA|DA|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|dentist near me no insurance|4,404|Home Member Find Dentist Deita| | |
|dentist near me accepting new patients|5,033|Find Dentist | Delta Dental|58| |
|dentist near me for kids|1,388|https://www.deltadentalins.com/indi_|1| |
|dental offices near me|59,835|Best Dentists Near Me Zocdoc|56| |
|dentist office near me|59,885|https://www.zocdoc.com/dentists| | |

See all suggestions See full analysis

# Keyword research results for the query of 'dentist near me'

showing monthly volume, difficulty, organic CTR, and priority from Moz Keyword Explorer: A key benefit of Moz is the organic click-through rate (CTR) and priority metrics. The CTR shows the expected number of clicks you’ll receive if you rank in the top ten for the entered keyword and priority helps you understand whether or not you should try to rank for the entered keyphrase. A higher priority represents a higher volume and lower difficulty whereas a lower priority means the keyphrase has low volume and high difficulty.

SEMRush and Moz are a few of the various SEO platforms out there. Each of these tools are easy to use, with a variety of data that will help you understand your audience and which keywords to target. Once you've identified the keywords you want to target, you can then build out the key components of your site, starting with the user experience.

# Mobile Friendliness

People search for just about everything—including which dentist to go to on their phones: That's why 'mobile-first' has become such a strong element of website usability and organic search results. In fact, your website should be built and developed for mobile and then for desktop, not the other way around.

Google ranks mobile responsive sites first—it's a large factor of search rank ability. Due to this ranking system, ensuring your site is optimized correctly for mobile responsiveness is extremely powerful to where you fall in the search results.
---
# Mobile Responsiveness and Page Speed

Desktop and mobile versions of websites separately, scoring you on each in regards to speed and organic friendliness. However, search rank order is based on mobile usability: a mobile responsive website simply means that when your website is viewed on a phone, or any device of any size, the layout, content, images, and all other components are displayed correctly and users experience the same information when migrating from desktop to mobile. In short, everything on your website should be responsive and adaptive to different screen sizes.

Having a mobile responsive website benefits search engines and end-users alike. It's not only crucial in establishing credibility and trust on your site but improving ease of use, regardless of whether you're on a computer or phone. Checking these boxes improves the likelihood the user will convert to an actual patient at your practice.

# Page Speed

Page speed is defined as the time it takes a page on your website to load after a user clicks on the link from the search engine results page. Page speed involves evaluating loading, interactivity, and visual stability on your website. The performance of your site's SEO is heavily influenced by page speed. To measure page speed, we suggest using PageSpeed Insights by Google: (pagespeed.web.dev).

Slow web pages may result in people leaving the site before it loads, but more often than not, page speed feels fine from a user perspective while riddled with problems from a search engine perspective. Google rates page speed on both mobile and desktop, based on how quickly its robots can scan and load the website page, not based on how quickly the user actually sees the page. For this reason, if you have design, functionality, code, or other components that hinder Google from scanning and fully opening the page in two seconds or less, your page speed numbers will decrease and negatively impact your search results and SEO efforts.

The next page shows some examples of what the pagespeed report will highlight and show you. The report will give you different numbers for mobile speed versus desktop speed. For this reason, make sure that you are optimizing for both platforms.

For desktop page speeds, it can be greatly affected by the 'plug-ins' that you have running on your web browser: So having these additional plug-ins running may decrease the page speed by up to 10 points. In terms of averages, we would hope that you see in the 90s for desktop versions, but even a score in the 80s is a positive result. For mobile, most sites average about 40, so anything upwards of 50 is very good. In mobile, the speed is greatly affected by various mobile devices, plans, and platforms the website can be seen on.
---
# Core Web Vitals Assessment: Passed

Computed from the Core Web Vitals metrics over the latest 28-day collection period.

Learn more

Expand view

|Mobile|Desktop|
|---|---|
|First Contentful Paint (FCP)|1.6 s|
|Largest Contentful Paint (LCP)|1.8 s|
|First Input Delay (FID)|N/A|
|Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)|0.00|

Latest 28-day collection period: Various mobile devices

Full visit durations: Various network connections

All Chrome versions

# Performance

Values are estimated and may vary: The performance score is calculated directly from these metrics. See calculator

0-49 50-89 90-100

# METRICS

|Metric|Value|
|---|---|
|First Contentful Paint|1.0 s|
|Time to Interactive|1.3 s|
|Speed Index|1.0 s|
|Total Blocking Time|0 ms|
|Largest Contentful Paint|1.3 s|
|Cumulative Layout Shift|0.006|

Captured at Apr 24, 2022, 6.33 AM CDT

Emulated Desktop with Lighthouse 9.3.0

Single page load

Initial page load: Custom throttling

Using Headless Chromium 98.0.4758.102 with Ir
---
# Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Compliance

ADA compliance is often overlooked when it comes to making a website. Any website ~new or existing~ must follow ADA compliance. As health practitioners, you're all likely familiar with the Americans with Disabilities Act which requires businesses to accommodate patients with disabilities. While the act is commonly understood in the physical realm, it also extends to the digital aspect of your practice.

Your website should be accessible to users who use voice or screen readers, or any other assistive technologies. Ensure you have an ADA Accessibility Statement page on your website that includes additional resources for your users to access speech recognition software, keyboard navigation, text magnification, alternative background colors, or ability to enlarge mouse. A few basic accessibility things your website should offer:

1. Content architecture. Use sequential headings (H1, H2, H3) to denote navigation and organization.
2. Alternative text (alt text). Ensure you have well-written alt text on every image. Alt text is read by screen readers in place of images, allowing your image content to be accessed by people who are blind or have a visual impairment. It is also processed by search engines to understand what an image is depicting.
3. Color contrast. Use sufficiently-contrasting colors between backgrounds and text so it's readable for users with low vision, low contrast vision, or color vision deficiency.
4. Captions. Ensure captioning or transcript is available for videos or audio clips.
5. Autoplay. Don't autoplay videos.

ADA Compliance is a factor that Google takes into account when evaluating overall website performance and determining rank status. This makes ADA Compliance doubly important; as it improves website accessibility; and aids in attaining a higher ranking position in search results.

# Search Engine Accessibility

Once you've created a site that has superior visual components - eye-catching design, accurate content; loads quickly, and works well on mobile - you'll need to ensure that search engines can actually 'see' these pages. This is typically a setting in WordPress or other sites that allow your website's pages to be visible by these platforms. Ensuring your website is accessible to search engines is the most important component of SEO. If your site can't be found by search engines, it won't be found by users searching for a dentist.

Search engines have three primary functions: crawling, indexing, and ranking. Your website needs to be accessible so search engines can crawl your site, index your pages, then rank your content in search results.

- Crawling: Scouring the Internet for new and updated content.
- Indexing: Processing and storing the content discovered during the crawling process. Pages that have been indexed are eligible to display in search results.
---
# Ranking: Displaying search results in order of most relevant to least relevant to best answer a search query:

According to Google's most recent information:

If you've recently added or made changes to a page on your site, you can request that Google re-index your page using any of the methods listed here. You can't request indexing for URLs that you don't manage.

Are you using a hosted content management platform (for example, Blogger or Wordpress)? In most cases, the platform submits your new content to search engines automatically: Check your platform's support articles.

# General guidelines

Crawling can take anywhere from a few days to a few weeks. Be patient and monitor progress using either the Index Status report or the URL Inspection tool:

- All methods described here have about the same response time.
- There is a quota for submitting individual URLs.
- Requesting a recrawl multiple times for the same URL or sitemap won't get it crawled any faster.

# Crawl request methods

Use the URL Inspection tool (just a few URLs)

Note: You must be an owner or full user of the Search Console property to be able to request indexing in the URL Inspection tool.

Use the URL Inspection tool to request a crawl of individual URLs. Note that if you have large numbers of URLs, submit a sitemap instead.

# To submit a URL to the index:

1. Follow the general guidelines.
2. Inspect the URL using the URL Inspection tool.
3. Select Request indexing: The tool will run a live test on the URL to see whether it has any obvious indexing issues, and if not; the page will be queued for indexing: If the tool finds issues with the page, try to fix them.

Requesting a crawl does not guarantee that inclusion in search results will happen instantly or even at all. Our systems prioritize the fast inclusion of high quality, useful content:

# Submit a sitemap (many URLs at once)

A sitemap is an important way for Google to discover URLs on your site. A sitemap can also include additional metadata about alternate language versions, video, image, or news-specific pages. Learn how to create and submit a sitemap.

Once again, remember that if your page is not accessible by Google and other search engines, then you are practically invisible to the entire online world.
---
# Online Authority

Online authority, in the web atmosphere, is referred to as domain authority (DA): Domain authority is the term that denotes the strength of a website to rank over time within search results. Scores are based on a variety of factors and range from one to 100. Domain authority also incorporates the level of trust a website has by its users, the industry, and search engines. While domain authority does not directly impact your ranking status, it is an indicator of the likelihood of your site to rank and continue to rank.

The factors that determine your domain authority are largely related to your link strategy: A link strategy is essentially your website's digital network: Much like you have a personal network, your website has a digital network. Your website's digital network takes into account components like:

- Breadth, depth, and connections on social channels
- The number of external website links on your website
- Including both links from another website to your site, and your site to other websites
- The domain authority and trustworthiness of the external website links on your website
- The number of external links pointing to your website
- The domain authority and trustworthiness of the external links pointing to your website

Ex: (CNN.com → Your site) is a powerful link; whereas (your site → CNN.com) does not hold much authority.

Domain authority scores rely on overall site health but are largely driven by external linking practices. It is also impacted by your competitors and other websites in your landscape looking to secure the same keywords as your website. If the other websites increase in domain authority, it is likely your domain authority will decrease in response. This is why it's important that you not only set domain authority goals based on your competitor's domain authority but keep an eye on your competitor's organic efforts and search visibility: The three main strategic points in online authority are link profile, social media profiles, and online listings.

# Link Profile

We know the key component for improving rankings is having a site that shows you are an expert, authoritative, and trustworthy: Your link profile is one of the largest contributors to establishing your site as such. Link profiles include the number of external websites that link to your website (backlinks), the authority of those external websites, and the relevance of the external website to your website.

Generally speaking, the more connected your website is, the more search engines trust you. However, it's not just about quantity when it comes to links. Effective link profiles are made up of diverse, relevant, non-spammy backlinks. The combination of quality and quantity of backlinks works to establish your website's credibility, which builds your search rankings.
---
However, links do not always help your site and its authority: Watch out for malicious (spam) sites that link to your website. They will hurt your site! Over time, if Google sees that the traffic is from a spam source, they will start to discount your search engine results - thinking that maybe you are purchasing the traffic yourself to increase visibility on Google's platform. You can combat this by going to your profile and marking these traffic sources as spam.

Actively monitoring your link profile health and removing spam links to establish your online authority: To keep an eye on this, look at your Google Analytics report every month to see the top referral sources for your site, and make sure that it is traffic that you want:

# Social Media

Social media outlets are digital networking tools. Since domain authority scores are calculated based on the breadth, respect, and trustworthiness of your digital network and yourself, it's easy to see why social media becomes an important factor in organic and website performance efforts.

There is evidence both for and against the idea that social content, links, and connections impact organic search, domain authority, and ranking scores. Many times a site that is doing well on organic search is also performing well on social. However, we do not know for certain that all social posting and activity boosts organic search. The likely answer, in our perspective, is that it influences organic results and domain authority but is not one of the largest impacts on these components. If you look at the simple math, some databases report approximately 3 million posts to Facebook every minute. If you combine that with over 4.6 billion web pages - that's a lot of crawling for Google's search engine to do on both sites and social media. And that's just one search engine. All this goes to say that social media certainly impacts DA, but it's unclear the extent of its overall impact.

# Important Point

Remember the power of social media: Beyond SEO, social outlets provide value in brand awareness. The higher your brand awareness is, the more likely you are to rise in search rankings and Google Ad conversions. Social outlets are a valuable tool for building awareness quickly and ensuring that all of your marketing is working for you.

# Online Listings

Your website, while the hub of your digital footprint, is just one place to present your business online. Surrounding your website and your brand with online listings that are present in digital resource hubs or online dental review and resource centers can positively impact your brand and digital footprint.

Through online listings, you increase your digital network, thereby positively impacting your domain authority and ensuring your practice shows up in the 'digital malls' people look to for.
---
Advice, options, and solutions. For example, Yelp is a common online listing tool used by all types of industries and consumers to rate and review businesses. Yelp has trained the consumer to visit their app to see what other people are saying about a product or service before making a decision for themselves. If your practice is on Yelp and other types of online listing communities, the consumer will not only become aware of your business but can start to form a level of 'likeability and interest in your business.

You want to ensure that your online listings are consistent and accurate. Doing so will give the user confidence that they can trust the information because it's the same everywhere they look. The consistent data will also help Google in establishing your business as a reliable source. And, of course, as we discussed, increasing the level of trust in your website and your business positively impacts your domain authority.

# There are two major companies that will help you audit your listings:

- BrightLocal
- Semrush

Semrush has a tool to check your listings for free at: https://www.semrush.com/listings-management/start/

|clients|Locations|Citation Builder|Reputation Manager|Leads|SEO Looks|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Claton Builder|Finished|X| | | |
|91363|ALE 15.7016|37363| | | |
|Aug 15 2016|Fuez 92016|JMc| | | |
|Sep 26 2016|Directors|Campaign Date: Avg 15, 2016|ECogewt|Jcl Aug 23, 2016| |
|Facebook|70|ALE 23 2016|49 23 2016| | |
|pitsqugecon|~vb. V3|23.2015|Mc~|718 2.2016| |
|xhitevages;coni|#0#|4LE 2, 2016|L33|Fu6 22, 2016| |
| |AvE 2, 2810| | | | |
---
# Your Business Online Presence

We can fix all issues and add your business to 89 directories.

89 potential listings
Present
42
With issues
Not present
Unavailable
You can see how it checks 89+ places for potential listings and gives you areas where you are in a directory or whether you have issues that might make your listing not present.

|Directory|Status|Business name|Address|Phone number|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Amazon Alexa|Top directory|#tthi5 directory is relevant to your business|I've submitted YOUR listing there.| |
|Apple|Top directory|Capital Dental|5609 $ 27th St|(402) 420-0999|
|Bing|Present|Capital Dental|5609 $ 27th St|4024200999|
|Facebook|Present|Respond to Facebook reviews directly from Semrush with Premium.| | |
|Foursquare|P.|Capital Dental|5609 $ 27th St|Your (402) 420-0999|
|Google Business|Present|Respond to Google Business Profile reviews directly from Semrush with Premium.| | |
|Instagram|Top directory|If this directory is relevant to your business, we submit your listing there.| | |

# On-Site Optimization

On-site optimization (or technical SEO) is all about helping search engines more easily understand what a page on your site has to offer: Good on-site SEO enables search engines to more efficiently determine the value your site has for searchers, and ultimately increase your rankings in search results.

The details covered in this section are aspects that people who visit your website will never see or know about—but search engines will: You can have a well-designed website with quality content that's seemingly perfect; but it can fall short in rankings if found to be lacking in technical SEO.

# Keywords, Descriptions, and Titles

They are mighty: While often invisible to the normal user; these simple components can greatly enhance SEO. Each of these items functions as an indicator to search engines about what a specific page on your website is about and the problem it solves or the question it answers for users.

Keywords (or keyphrases) tell search engines what content topics your page covers and which search queries your page should rank for: You can set one focus keyphrase (the most important/relevant keyphrase to the page) and additional related keywords. Related keywords are terms that are very similar to the primary keyword: For example, a misspelling of your company name, or 'dentist practice' instead of 'dental practice'. Google has best practices for how many keywords a page should contain. Simply just because you can assign a lot of keywords to a page doesn't mean you should: Using too many keywords can confuse search engines or seem as if you're trying to trick them into ranking for keywords that aren't related to the content on your page. Either of these strategies will cause your rankings to drop.
---
# SEO Best Practices for Dentists

Keyword stuffing is known as a practice that Google will penalize your site if it suspects you are using this method to achieve a higher ranking in search results. Users won't know or see what keywords are assigned to your website pages, but they will see the meta-title and meta-description for each page within the search results.

# Meta-Titles and Meta-Descriptions

Meta-titles function as the initial cue to search engines as to what a page is about and display as a clickable link on the search results page. Meta-descriptions describe what the page is about and are displayed under the title in search results. Having clear, concise, and accurate meta titles and descriptions help improve the quality of traffic you receive to your site.

# Google Preview

|Preview as:|Mobile result|Desktop result|
|---|---|---|
|mycapitaldental.com|Dentist Lincoln, NE|Capital Dental|
|Affordable Dental Care|Affordable Dental Care|Affordable Dental Care|
|Jan 21, 2020|Jan 21, 2020|Jan 21, 2020|
|Dentist office in Lincoln, NE, offering affordable dental care with an emphasis on patient comfort.|Dentist office in Lincoln, NE, offering affordable dental care with an emphasis on patient comfort.|Dentist office in Lincoln, NE, offering affordable dental care with an emphasis on patient comfort.|
|Explore our services and call today:|Explore our services and call today:|Explore our services and call today:|

# SEO Title

Insert variable
Dentist Lincoln; NE
Separator
Site title
Separator
Affordable Dental Care

# Meta Description

Insert variable
Dentist office in Lincoln; NE, offering affordable dental care with an emphasis on patient comfort. Explore our services and call today:

# Search Results Page

When the primary keyphrase (dentist lincoln ne) is searched, displaying meta-title and meta-description with each word in the keyphrase bolded as it appears in the description.

# Services Offered

Preventative Care * Restorative Dentistry * Cosmetic Dentistry * Specialties
---
# Image Optimization

Whenever possible, begin your meta-title and meta-description with your primary keyword. This layers the signal to search engines on the correct topic of your page. Always include location information in your titles and descriptions if possible. This greatly enhances local SEO by displaying to users and search engines where your practice is located:

Keep your keywords relevant to the content on the page. Write compelling titles and descriptions that include the primary keyword you want to rank for and efficiently explain to users what your page is about:

# Best Practices for Optimizing Images

1. File name. Ensure the file name of each image is descriptive and includes any relevant keywords. Search engines read the image file name to better understand what the image is portraying: For images of the office, doctors, or team members use the practice name, city, and state in each image file name.
2. File size. Resize or compress images as much as possible to reduce the file size without sacrificing quality: Images should be under 100kb if possible and in JPEG format: Smaller file sizes help ensure your page speed remains fast.
3. Alt text. We've discussed the importance of alt text on images for ADA compliance. Write alt text for your images in easy-to-understand language that effectively describes the image.

# Attachment details

|PACE|Uploaded on: April 20, 2022|
|---|---|
|Uploaded by: Support|File name: agd-pace-logo.png|
|File type: image/png|File size: 60 KB|
|Dimensions: 828 by 401 pixels|Alternative Text: Describe the purpose of the image. Leave empty if the image is purely decorative.|
|Title: agd-pace-logo|Caption:|
|Description:|In the picture above, the Wordpress website format gives you the opportunity to list alt text; Title, Caption and Description. It is important to include all this information in whatever platform you are using to create your site. In total, optimized images improve user experience, contribute to page speed performance, and make your website more accessible.|
---
# URL Structure

Earlier in the chapter; we discussed the best way to select a primary domain that's optimized for SEO. Your domain is just one of the pieces of architecture for your website. Under your primary domain sits all of the URLs for each page on your site. Search engines use your webpage's URL structure to understand the layout, organization, and main topics of your content.

A URL, or uniform resource locator, is an address that helps a web browser locate a specific webpage, picture, file, or other resources. Your domain name is the primary URL for your website, the URL structure is the sequence of breadcrumbs in your URL as users and search engines navigate from page to page, and the slug is the very last breadcrumb in the URL. See below for examples of each:

|Domain:|Mycapitaldental|a domain is the specific name of your website|
|---|---|---|
|URL:|Mycapitaldental.com|a URL is an address to each specific page of your website|
|Breadcrumb:|services/teeth-whitening|a breadcrumb is an indicator to the user of the page they are visiting and the path they took to get there|
|Slug:|teeth-whitening|a slug indicates the name of a specific page for Google. In this instance, the page name is teeth whitening|

# URL Best Practices

- Follow a simple, clear, concise URL structure. URLs are the organization of your website's content. Intuitively organized content makes your website easier to navigate for users and search engines, helping them understand the connections between different pages on your site.
- Use hyphens to separate words. URLs don't recognize spaces as a way to separate words, so SEO best practice is to use hyphens between words. Hyphens show search engines and users where the breaks between words are.
- Use canonical tags. Canonical tags help prevent issues of duplicate content that we explore more in-depth later in this chapter.
- Use your target keyword included in the URL. Optimized URLs help search engines deliver relevant results to searchers, and helps searchers know exactly what they'll see if they click the link.

# Redirects

Redirects are a necessary component of a website, specifically when a new website is replacing an old website or new content is replacing old content.
---
We've discussed above that URLs, breadcrumbs, and slugs are all signals to Google on what a page is about and the path the user has taken to that page. If two similar URLs belong to pages that hold the same content you not only run into duplicate content issues but you are also splitting your ranking authority among two pages. This will end up diluting the value of both pages.

Redirecting the old URL to the new URL signals to search engines that one page is an older version of the page and to direct all authority to the new page.

# Canonical Tags

A canonical tag is a way of telling search engines that a specific URL represents the master copy of a page. Using the canonical tag prevents problems caused by identical or "duplicate" content appearing on multiple URLs. Practically speaking; the canonical tag tells search engines which version of a URL you want to appear in search results.

Google penalizes sites for duplicate content; so canonical tags play an important role when duplicate content is necessary on a website. If two similar or exact pieces of content appear on two different URLs, it creates confusion for search engines and will impact rankings. The search engine will also not rank both pieces of content; so you end up essentially sharing online authority between two pages. Instead of ranking one page high, you settle to rank one medium-high:

When duplicate information is required, canonical tags are a feature that tells the search engine to treat one page as the primary and the other as a copy - essentially directing all ranking power to one page.

# Structured Data

Structured data is code that's placed throughout your site and includes key information about each page so search engines can better understand what the page has to offer: This code is a system that pairs a name with a value that search engines use to categorize and store your content correctly: Instead of hoping search engines understand that the image in the top right is your logo, the image halfway down the page is your product, and the content at the top is your product description, you tell search engines through structured data techniques what is what; ensuring any possibility of confusion is eliminated:

Adding structured data improves the likelihood that your site will display in search results by enhancing the snippets that display in the search results. These snippets of data are the short grayed-out text that are shown in Google results around your search term: For dental practices, this information should always include the practice name, office hours, address, and phone number:
---
# Measuring and Tracking Search Performance

To evaluate your site's performance, here are a couple of tools we use when looking to see how sites are performing month over month:

# Page experience overview

100% URLs with a good page experience on mobile
Mobile
Cccc UR_> azod VA $
100%
199K
44

Google Search Console and Bing Webmasters are free tools that allow an in-depth look at your site's organic search performance; they do not include information from paid advertising related to your website. These tools reveal how search engines understand your website and display user data. The five key capabilities of these tools are listed below:

1. Submit a sitemap. A sitemap is a file that lists your site's most important pages and provides details about the content and overall structure of your website. It is a crucial part of getting your website found and more easily processed by search engines. Make sure you've submitted your sitemap to both Google Search Console and Bing Webmasters.
2. See indexed pages. Pages that are indexed simply mean that they will show in search results for users. These will include your most important pages.
3. Know your mobile usability: Through these tools, you can see if any page on your website has any issues when accessed on a mobile device and get tips on how to fix the errors.
4. Access user data. There's a ton of information available through these platforms so you know how your site or a specific page is performing: See your top-performing pages, know the search queries that led to your site, see your link profile, and identify rankings.
5. Remove spam links: Through these platforms, you can tell the search engines which spam links have attached themselves to your site. In doing so, search engines will dissociate these erroneous links from your website.

As mentioned previously, Google Analytics is the most powerful platform to access data about your site's usage and success: If you are handling the site yourself, make sure to dig into this platform to more fully understand the useful data it provides.

Overall, while Search Engine Optimization is a skill you can master as a dentist; most of the time we suggest that a dentist hires this out and seeks professional help in this area. While it can cost quite a bit for this skillset; the resulting ROI on this investment should more than outweigh the cost. However, to adequately outsource this, we hope that this chapter has given you the tools to do your due diligence on web developers and ask the right questions to find the best one for your specific needs.
---
# Notes

100
---
# Chapter 5

# Online Paid Marketing

While having a beautiful and search-engine friendly website is the standard level of marketing, most practices also need to use online paid marketing to enhance their practice's visibility: This includes paying for digital advertisements on Google, Facebook, or other platforms. Google Ads (formerly referred to as Google AdWords) fall above organic search engine results, instantly gaining more visibility for your website. Paid social ads sit across popular social outlets such as Facebook (Meta); Instagram, Pinterest; or TikTok. While many online avenues are available, paid Facebook ads and Google Ads carry the most value for dental practices, which is why we suggest that dentists focus a majority of their efforts on these two channels. While neither offer the complete package, each offers a unique set of advantages to further your marketing goals.

More specifically, the target audience for each platform is slightly different, so knowing your target audience and your digital advertising options can help you align your practice's goals with the correct channels:

# SEO Versus Digital Advertising

We have already discussed the importance of branding for building awareness and growing your practice. However; what most business owners don't know is that website traffic also correlates directly to business growth, conversions, and brand awareness. The more website traffic you gain, the more your brand value increases and the more leverage you make toward increased patients and practice production growth.

There are two types of traffic to consider on your website: traffic targeted for conversion and general website traffic. One often undervalued advantage of digital advertising is that it drives total website traffic in conjunction with conversions. Both types of traffic are valuable. Don't fall into the trap of only being concerned with conversions, or people who are actively looking to make a buying decision: This type of traffic is important; but remember just because someone doesn't click on your ad does not mean there isn't value: Remember from Chapter 2 that 'Brand Recognition' plays a large role in the buying decision, and even a passerbyer's quick glance at the advertisement means there is one more person who has been exposed to your brand.
---
Another important consideration that pertains to digital advertising is that your cost per click tends to be significantly lower when people are searching for your specific brand. As we talked about before, one of the factors that determines your ad's performance is the quality content on your site. If your site is fully branded towards your practice and provides a high quality experience for the user; you'll be rewarded in both awareness and conversions:

# Important Point

Buying Google Ads on your own brand is usually cheaper because your practice is the best match for the term. Other competitors might be trying to buy ads based around your brand name (we have seen this in competitive markets with DSOs), so buying your own name is a smart idea that costs very little.

When building a brand through online ads, keep in mind that users cannot search for something they don't know exists. Simply put: a potential patient cannot search on Google for your practice name, if they don't even know about your practice. Digital advertising offers a way for you to force your practice name into search results. While Search Engine Optimization uses key terms, algorithms, user search preferences and best practices to build a 'net' around your practice and drive people based on related content; digital advertising bypasses the need to build organic authority by forcing your name within search results. The ultimate goal is one helps the other; digital advertising helps cover the gaps, while organic optimization builds a foundation for your practice on search. Organic optimization secures a steadfast long-term future (when managed correctly), while digital advertising solves a short-term need for brand recognition.

Digital advertising provides the detailed targeting that we discussed previously while also allowing you to present your ad with branded graphics, further encouraging users to click through your site. Audiences can be targeted by a number of unique identifying factors, including gender, age, location, interests, etc. These subsets of users can be extremely important in picking whether you are going to advertise implants to an older 'baby-boomer' population, or whitening to a younger wedding-ready population.

# Determining Which Platform to Use

Each platform offers unique capabilities for both advertisers and users. Understanding the advantages and disadvantages of each one is something that is crucial for executing a fully-formed marketing strategy. Ask yourself questions and define your goals in order to build out a reliable and structured approach for your next campaign.

A few questions to begin this process include:

- What is your goal?
- Is this service best described by image, text, or both?
---
Who is your ideal patient; and what activities/hobbies might they be interested in?

How expensive is this service you are offering, and does insurance cover it?

Do you have a page on your website that continues the ad message without interruption?

How aggressive/passive do you want to be with your marketing?

How much is your budget for this campaign? What is your breakeven for each service you provide, based on this budget?

Can you repurpose any existing assets to build out your Advertising Campaign?

# What is your goal?

Typical goals might be brand awareness, online scheduling, or announcing a new location: The speed at which you want to accomplish these goals, and the balance between short-term and long-term goals, should shape your paid digital strategy: For instance, Facebook and Google Ads are great at building short-term brand awareness. For this goal, you may run a high volume of Facebook ads focused around the brand alongside a few general Google Ads to get a high ranking with major search terms associated with your brand.

Google Ads is especially valuable for gaining conversions around general dental services, while Facebook is a great complement to higher-end services where your market has potential to expand: For example, if you are looking outside of a 15 mile radius of your practice, then Facebook can be a great tool to target and market these services. However, for long-term brand awareness around your practice, dentists, and services, we suggest SEO and Google Organic Search as the best option. SEO is also a great complement to a digital strategy aimed at increasing web traffic and website authority.

# Is this service best described with an image, text; or both?

Images for specialties like teeth whitening present best on Facebook: Visuals help people see themselves in the process. It's always better to show straighter; whiter teeth than to tell people to take your word for it: The difficulty here is that Facebook's rules now sometimes prohibit the use of photography in advertising, so make sure to use images that align with their rules on beauty and healthcare. Google Search is non-image based (unless utilizing Display Network), so you will have to rely on other platforms if seeking to showcase your work through visuals. However, it's worth noting that Display Network on Google is not usually recommended for most dentists. There are other available options of this type of digital advertising that offer more value and return on investment.

# Who is your ideal patient; and what activities/hobbies might they be interested in?

Knowing the demographic and psychological makeup of your audience is important: Think about your ideal patient in all aspects:

- How old are they?
- Do they have a family?
---
# Where do they shop?

# What do they enjoy in their free time?

# Where do they go for information?

Understanding these aspects allows you to be specific with your targeting and more confident that your ads are being served to the right people.

# How expensive is this service you are offering, and does insurance cover it?

Match the expense to the demographic and the message on the ad. Expensive procedures that may not be covered by dental insurance should be targeted towards higher income individuals or presented via a message that clearly talks about a payment plan as an option for payment:

We also see, in general, that higher production procedures warrant a higher budget for advertising spending: We have heard that 'All-on-X' procedures sometimes cost $1,000/case in advertising to get a $50,000 case.

# Do you have a page on your website that continues the ad message without interruption?

Your ad should lead to a landing page that seamlessly continues the conversation you started without speed bumps. Consider the user experience as they click on your advertisement to learn more about the product or service. If a user clicks a digital ad, does the page they land on look consistent to that ad? Does it continue the conversation in a seamless manner and hit on all of the important aspects your user may want to understand before purchasing your service?

This page should be built to represent your product/service while giving the user clear opportunities to convert: 'Buy Now' or 'Schedule Now:' Remember that a major key to building trust is to answer the customer's next best question. Many times the best option is to build a new page to achieve this goal. If you can enhance the online experience with a fresh, new page that optimizes the user experience, this is always your best route.

# How aggressive/passive do you want to be with your marketing?

More aggressive plans could include multiple channels (Facebook Ads, postcards, and a Google Ads campaign): The aggressiveness of your plan also depends on your goals. If you are in the startup phase of your practice and your schedule is completely wide open, you may choose to be extremely aggressive to fill appointments quickly: On the reverse, if your practice is full and you are seeing more patients than you can handle, then you may choose to market less aggressively:

In general, this also extends to the type of procedures you will be marketing for: If your schedule is completely open, then you will want to market for any and all types of patients just to fill chair-time. However, if you are quite busy and booked-out in scheduling, then we suggest that you target high-dollar procedures or emergency patients that generate more revenue per hour than other procedures:
---
# How much is your budget for this campaign?

What is your breakeven for each service you provide based on this budget?

All platforms offer a range of options for budget controls. The key here is having an idea of where you want the money to go, how much you're willing to spend each month, and how much you're willing to pay per conversion. Once you arrive at these three metrics, you can then develop a plan for the layout and execution of the rest of the strategy. In the beginning of this book, we suggested that you come up with a budget for general marketing spending. We suggest looking back at that to look at your total marketing spending. Digital advertising spend will constitute a portion of this budget; but you will also want to leave room for other marketing expenses as well. In order to make sure you arrive at the best metrics, we suggest that you perform the exercise for 'Cost per Procedure' as discussed by Dr. Mark Costes, which is outlined on this spreadsheet in the associated Document Vault.

Download the Cost per Procedure Spreadsheet here:

# Can you repurpose any existing assets to build out your Advertising Campaign?

Always remember that a great piece of content or a quality image can have multiple purposes. For example, you can use imagery from your website on a paid Facebook ad, or use customer reviews from Google Business Profile to create an aesthetic Facebook ad. Since customers are always looking for outside validation of your services, it is popular to use customer quotes in digital ads, or as website testimonials that provide confidence in services. Remember to be creative and resourceful. Each piece of content or design doesn't have to be one-and-done; you can make it work for your practice as long as it's relevant.

# Google Advertising

Google Ads are perhaps one of the first things people think of when they hear the term Digital Marketing. No doubt; Google was a pioneer into the age of online advertising, but using this tool effectively isn't always as straightforward as one might think.

Google provides a platform from which users can search, as well as the means by which advertisers can serve ads to these users. Think back to the SEO section of this book and remember that each keyword typed into the Google search bar triggers a response in the Search Engine Results Pages. The same goes for Google Search ads. When a user types in a query, the Google Algorithm begins an "auction" to see which ads will be served, and in some cases, how those ads will look. The components of the auction vary, but targeting, keywords,
---
# Setting Up a Google Ad Strategy

Site content, ad quality, and budget are the main components within your control. Having the correct combination of these factors is the foundation of a potentially successful Google Ads strategy.

You will often hear Google Ads referred to as "pay-per-click" ads, or PPC for short: Pay-per-click ads are exactly what they sound like; you only pay when someone clicks on that advertisement.

When it comes to Google Ads, always remember: Google puts the users first. Relevant ads that point to high-quality sites will be rewarded with better placement and, as a result, more clicks. These high-quality ads "win" the auction. It is in Google's best interest to connect users with the highest quality product or service they are looking for. It is subsequently your job to tell Google what you offer in a clear and concise way that matches the user's search intention, why it's relevant to their search, and how a user can solve their problem through your advertisement.

# Objectives

When setting up a Google Ad strategy, it is important to evaluate your goals and align them to your business needs. Setting a clear and concise objective of what you want to achieve will help you understand how to set up your ad strategy appropriately. For example, you may want to achieve three things:

- A 20% increase in emergency patients
- 4 additional implant patients
- A 10% increase in general dentistry patients

# Checklist for Setting Up and Managing a Google Ads Account

We've provided a checklist below on the steps you will need to take when setting up and managing a Google Ads account and ad strategy. Each of these steps is explained further throughout this chapter:

# 1. Determine your Objectives

- Clearly articulate the business need
- Define Google AdWord goals that will meet the desired need

# 2. Form a Budget

- Calculate what you want to spend per campaign on a monthly basis
- Choose a bid strategy
- Articulate what you want to spend per campaign on a monthly basis

# 3. Define Your Target Audience

- What sort of person is looking for your practice or your services offered

# 4. Campaign Structure & Ad Setup

- Create a Keyword list and split into Ad Groups
- Decide if you need more than one Campaign
---
# Keep in mind that budgets are set at Campaign level

- Assign Ad Groups to Campaign, add the Keywords into the appropriate Ad Group
- Set Budgets and Bidding Strategy
- Set Targeting/Geo-Targeting
- Write Ads & Add Extensions
- Utilize Responsive Search Ads or other relevant ad types
- Enter Keywords and phrases centered around your site content
- Designate a landing page (note: only 1 landing page assignment per ad group)
- Write and attach Extensions
- Think of what your Conversions are (ie: if one of your conversions is Click to Call, attach a Call Extension)
- Link Google Business Profile for Location Extensions
- Set Conversions & Tracking
- Define your conversions and attach to correct sources
- We use Google Tag Manager
- Test them
- Submit for Approval
- Once you have everything set up and verified, you are ready for approval
- This can take up to 72 hours, but typically runs faster
- Monitor and watch for issues (see Resource Guides for ongoing help)

# Choosing a Budget

When starting out your Google Ads strategy; I’ll have plenty of questions to consider: One of the first to come up will undoubtedly be centered around the budget. Choosing a budget depends on your goals, market; and other marketing factors. The best way to start is small, test the results, and then determine if you want to increase or decrease your investment: Our recommendation typically comes in at around $500 per month in ad spend for most accounts just starting a Google Ads strategy: This amount is big enough to get decent traction in most markets, but small enough to not be overly competitive and aggressive. We have seen most practices do quite well at this level, but it is interesting to see that national DSO corporations spend upwards of $5,000-810,000 a month on Google ads in some locations. Additionally, by starting at this mid-range budget of $500, you garner enough data in the first few months to understand how much a typical conversion will likely cost you throughout the life of the campaign. Once you have this baseline established, you can then allocate more funds and increase to $750 or more, depending on what your goals are. For example, if a general dentistry term has an average Cost per Conversion of $20, you can (reasonably) expect to see an additional 5 conversions for every $100 you add to the budget.
---
factors and variables to consider; this at least gives a gauge for expectations and strategy when you have the data to lean on.

It is not uncommon to see larger competitors investing tens of thousands of dollars in monthly Google Ad budgets. This isn't something we would want to compete with head-to-head. By keeping our target radius contained to the 3-5 miles around your practice, we are able to stay slightly less impacted by these larger competitors and determine a sensible budget.

# Quick Recap

Some marketing agencies will try to get dentists to spend upwards of $5,000-810,000 a month on Google Ads and Facebook Ads around implants or esthetic cases. This is typically grossly overspending, unless you have built out & complicated funnel (see Chapter 9) and your practice is based solely around these procedures. For 95% of dentists, this is not advisable and your return on investment will be very low: It could actually even hurt your other marketing efforts as patients will not see you as a solution for other dental needs.

Be aware that Google will always recommend a budget to you: Take these numbers into consideration; but do not rely on them as the actual amount to target: Just like any technology, Google can be informative to a point; but common sense and experience layered on top of the technology is critical: If you simply go with Google's recommendation, you will likely end up spending more than necessary to achieve your desired conversions.

# Understanding Your Target Audience

Another important aspect of your strategy comes from targeting the correct demographic: Since we know that all people need a dentist; we do not have to pointedly target new patients. Instead, think of location. Google's algorithm favors proximity and convenience. By targeting a tighter radius around your practice, you will likely see more relevant conversions. Typically, we would recommend about 5-7 miles around your practice. For near-residential areas, that should be more than enough: If you live in a rural area, anticipate a larger ideal radius.

While it is true that competitors may target a wider radius and see more traffic, bear in mind that more traffic does not always mean more patients in your exam rooms. We know that a large base of new patients are from referrals, with the rest being in-market patients looking for conveniently located dentists with good reviews. It's this demographic that our target radius is set to capture. By setting our radius at 5-7 miles around the practice location, we are able to capture, and hopefully convert, those users who are searching in that area.

# Google Campaigns and Ad Groups

A campaign is the "Big Picture" and is what sets the tone for the rest of the Google Ads structure. At this stage, think through your goals and how they break down as you go. Keep in mind that budgets are set at the campaign level, which means if you're hoping to designate a...
---
A specific amount of your budget to one service, and only that one service, you likely want to put it in its own campaign. That being said, you can always choose to go with one campaign, see how things perform, then break them out into separate campaigns in the future.

Each campaign contains ad groups. Think of these as containers for your ads and keywords. You can use them to better organize your goals and think through how your budget may be spent based on categories of products and services. This is where we begin to categorize keywords. For example, a General ad group would likely contain keywords like "dental cleaning" and "dentist near me," whereas a keyword like "dental implants" or "tooth replacement" would be placed in a Dental Implants group.

# Capital Dental Search Ads & Extensions

|Cold Sore|Landing Pages|Keyword Status|
|---|---|---|
|Dental Implants|Keywords|Enabled, Paused|
|Emergency Dental|Search Keywords|Total: All but removed keywords|
|General|Negative Keywords| |
|Sedation Dentistry|Search Terms| |
|Veneers|Auction Insights| |
|Whitening|Audience| |

|Keyword|Match Type|Status|
|---|---|---|
|"dentist lincoln"|Phrase Match|Eligible|
|"lincoln dentist"|Phrase Match|Eligible|
|"capital dental"|Exact Match|Eligible|
|"dentist near me"|Phrase Match|Eligible|

The next step in the process is creating your ads. Each Ad Group holds the ads. Your ads should be specific, informative, and based on keywords you have decided to bid on. There are a few types of ads to use. For most purposes, the Responsive Search Ad is the best option. With a Responsive Search Ad, you simply plug in a list of potential headlines and descriptions, then Google will serve a combination of those options to generate an ad based on what the user searched. An outline of an ad campaign and ad group structure is shown below for reference.

# Campaign Structure

Campaign (Overall Budget Limit is set at this level)

- Ad Group
- Ad
- Keyword
- Keyword
- Keyword
- Ad
- Keyword
- Keyword
- Keyword
- Ad Group
- Ad
- Keyword
- Keyword
- Keyword
---
# Google Ad Extensions

Ad Extensions help ads stand out in search engine results, while also being a source of quick, useful information for searchers. There are a variety of extensions to choose from to differentiate your ads while giving your market answers up front: Keep in mind that clicking an extension is treated the same as getting a click: you will be charged! Be sure these are utilized well and give useful information from the start. We typically attach a Call extension, which displays a phone number for the practice, as well as a Location extension, and other Callout extensions to highlight different services or assets the business offers. Sitelink extensions are a great way to create a short-cut to pages within your site, such as 'Meet the Doctor:' The five different types of ad extensions are listed below with further explanation.

|Callout|Additional text to highlight services or assets (e.g: $5 Laughing Gas)|
|---|---|
|Sitelink|Link to specific pages on your site|
|Location|Google take them straight to your site|

Ad: Capital Dental in Lincoln

We are Accepting New Patients

At Capital Dental we strive to make dentistry easy: Schedule an appointment online today! Put your mind at ease with dentists who have your comfort top of mind. $5 Laughing Gas. Virtual Smile Consult.

# Primary Parts of a Google Ad:

- Sitelink: Link to specific pages on your site
- Callout: Additional text to highlight services or assets (e.g: $5 Laughing Gas)
---
# Structured Snippet

Highlight a product or service (e.g: Service Catalog: Dental Implants etc)

# Click to Call

Add a phone number and make it convenient for your potential patients

# Location

Let Google take them straight to you

# Price

List prices on products and services directly on your ads

Note: Numbers in ads perform well. They catch attention, and serve a quantifiable purpose for searchers:

# Lead Form

Allow searchers to submit emails, phone, and contact info directly through the ad. This is a newer feature and might not be as successful for dental searches.

# App

Download apps directly from an ad

# Affiliate Locations

For retail chains that sell your product

# Bid Strategies

There are different ways to target, delegate, and optimize your bidding: Different bid strategies will spend differently, while remaining within your overall monthly budget. You can find more on these strategies here. We utilize Maximize Conversions mostly, meaning we bring a budget to Google and tell the system to maximize our budget to obtain the most conversions possible within our spending range. Not all bid strategies are available to all accounts. Some serve better with more data, while others are used for starters. Don't overthink this part. At the end of the day, Google wants to bring shoppers to you. Choose a safe bet: Maximize Conversions or Maximize Clicks, then build from there.

# Targeting

The next step is targeting: We've discussed this previously, but it can be found under the 'Audiences' tab in Google Ads: We utilize geo-targeting (found under 'Locations') as the best route, and build out from there. Interests, hobbies, and other characteristics are options for targeting; but guessing these characteristics of a target population can be tricky and random. Just remember; everyone needs a dentist; and almost no one outside the dental field puts "teeth" as an interest or hobby.

# Keywords

While keywords are a feature of both SEO and Google Ads, the strategy behind which keywords you choose will be different depending on the outlet you are utilizing: When using Google Ads, keywords are the terms you bid on. These are the topics, gleaned from your ideal audience, that you think people are searching for in your area. You can identify and bid on these words in several ways. In essence, the "bid" is the highest amount of money you are willing to spend on buying that possible click from a search user.

# Match Types

There are different forms of match types you can choose from, with each punctuated differently:

- Exact Match Keywords: [keyword] - Shows when your exact words are searched
- Phrase Match Keywords: "keyword" - Shows when a search contains your phrase
---
# Broad Match Keywords

Shows when a combination of your words are used. Negative keywords are also important to consider: These are words you DO NOT want included in the keywords you are bidding on. One example of a negative keyword would be someone looking for weekend dental care. If you don't offer appointments over the weekends, you'll want to add "Saturday" and "Sunday" to the negative keyword list: Google likes to help you through this process, and so negative keyword ideas can be found in the Search Terms tab of the Google Ads interface. Other negative keywords to watch out for could include broad terms that are relevant to your business but are irrelevant to the search results users expect when searching: For example, if your practice name is Sandy Dental Practice, you want to include the word "sandy" as a negative keyword: While the term "sandy" is relevant to your business name, there are far more searches using the term where the user's intention is entirely unrelated to your dental practice.

# Don't confuse keywords with search terms

While keywords are actual words used in searches, search terms refer to total words the user types into the Google search bar to search. If your ad category on the Google Ads platform shows for a search term, it will register in the Search Terms platform. As your account ages and amasses more history, you can use the history to refine your terms, ads, and negative keywords.

# Buying your Brand Keywords

Google Ads are a combination of bidding on geography and keywords with a certain investment: These investments are broken into campaigns and ad groups: One campaign we typically recommend is a brand campaign that builds brand awareness around your specific dental practice name, just as we discussed in Chapter 2 on branding. A brand campaign requires bidding on (paying for) your dental practice name and its similar spellings when they are searched by a user:

A question we get a lot is, "Why should I pay money for a click on my own practice name if they are already searching it; wouldn't it just come up through organic search?" Bidding on your own brand is a somewhat controversial practice, and it is a fair question. While bidding on your own brand terms isn't a requirement; we strongly recommend doing so for the following reasons.

1. Bidding on your own brand is cheap. First is that bidding on your own name is cheap. Typically, not many other people are bidding on your brand or doctor's name, so it will be much lower priced than a general dental term.
2. You do not want to allow a competitor to be shown: You do not want to allow a competitor to steal a top spot next to your product: Your brand is your own, but that won't stop others from bidding on it too. Competitive bidding practices happen when another practice starts bidding on terms belonging to their competitors in the marketplace. We don't recommend this strategy because it reflects poorly upon your integrity in the marketplace, but that doesn't stop it from happening: We have even seen people create Google Ads for other Doctors' names, which is unethical and may even break advertising rules depending on the state in which you reside.
---
We suggest avoiding this at all costs. Instead, by bidding on your own brand, you have the upper hand and hopefully can avoid the bad actors out in the marketplace.

In the example below, we show a search around the nutritional supplement "Athletic Greens." In the top two spaces, it shows the ads, first from the company itself; and second from a top competitor:

|Ad|www.athleticgreens.com|
|---|---|
|Athletic Greens|Athletic Greens® Official Site|
|Even though the person searching on a search engine is looking for a certain product;|they might get sucked into another product if they are not aware enough of the marketplace.|
|To avoid this, companies may purchase their own keywords as paid advertising:| |

Ingredients and Benefits

Read about the ingredients in AG1. We hold AG1 to a higher standard. Try AG1.

Quite possibly one of the most convenient products on Earth.

FAQ

Learn everything you want to know about AG1.

Contact us

Find out how to get in touch. Athletic Greens customer service.

Ad www.smarer-reviews.com

The Truth About Green Powder Must Read This Before You Buy

Our Algorithm Scanned Through Them All Here Are The Most Effective Green Juice Powders.

Our Experts Reveal The Straight Facts. Don't Waste Time With Generic Supplements. Clinically Studied, Vegan & Keto Friendly Best Dietary Supplement.

Do Green Superfoods Work? Top Rated Green Powder Beware Of Harmful Fillers For Kids.

Finally, remember our discussion about Google rewarding high quality sites? This holds true for buying your brand keywords as well. No one is more dominant on your brand than you are! Your website will be the authoritative source on your own brand, and this will help drive your ads to the top.

# Measuring and Tracking

There are various data points you can track to measure the performance of your ads. The most commonly used data points are impressions, cost-per-click, and cost-per-conversion.

Impressions are the views you get when your ad is shown: These are often broken down into impressions per user. For example, your ad may have 1,000 impressions but the impressions per user was five. This means your ad was served to the same user five times, and an average of 200 people saw your ad.

You do not pay for impressions unless you choose this type of conversion when setting up your ads. However, impressions do affect other pieces of data such as click-through rate. For this reason, you want your total number of impressions to be as relevant as possible for your clicks to be high-converting:
---
# Search Impression Share

Search Impression Share is the impressions you've received on Google search sites divided by the estimated number of impressions you were eligible to receive. Essentially, this is how much of the market that you "own." Because you are essentially bidding to have impressions, this shows you how 'on-target' your ads are in the marketplace. However, if your impression share is low, then your ad group is most likely not targeting correctly.

# Cost-per-click

Cost-per-click is how much you pay for one click, something you’ll likely want to keep an eye on frequently. Cost-per-click fluctuates and depends on a lot of factors, including competitors' moves, search intent, landing page value, and more.

# Cost-per-conversion

Cost-per-conversion (also known as cost-per-acquisition, or CPA) is arguably your most important data point. This is how much each conversion costs, and depends on your preset conversions. Typically, we recommend phone calls from ads and schedule online bookings as conversions, among others. The equation to calculate your cost-per-conversion is simply costs divided by the number of clicks plus phone calls from these ads.

# Example Report

At CMOshare, clients get reports based around their Google Ads and web traffic. Below is one piece of the report that discusses the client's search budget and how the ad campaign is performing: As a note, this report shows a practice in a high-growth mode in a competitive marketplace, so the budget is on the higher end of the spectrum that we typically see.

# Bayside

Bayside Dental Search Budget: $1,100

Bayside has a single campaign focusing on Dental Implants, Emergency Dental, and General. During September, the Dentures, Pediatric, Tooth Extraction, Veneers, and Whitening groups were paused. The budget was updated and increased on 8/16.

# Three Month Breakdown (9/1/2021 - 10/31/2021)

|Month|Conversions|CPA|
|---|---|---|
|August|21.00|$35.24|
|September|19.08|$58.18|
|October|14.92|$73.06|

# Observations

There was a drop off in conversions from August to October. This was the result of pausing the Pediatric group, which had seen 4.00 conversions in August. The CPA has increased over the past 3 months.
---
Impressions increased over the last few months. Part of this could be due to the recent Google updates on mobile infinite scroll. The slight reduction in CTR speaks to that change as well. Search impression share dropped off significantly for October:

We made some keyword changes at the end of October in hopes of reining this account in and focusing better on the new adgroup structure. We will continue to monitor and adjust as needed.

# Recommendations

I would recommend letting this account play out for a bit longer: There were some changes made in October that may help with this one. We could try adding Neighborhood extensions to the ads. This would call out specific residential boroughs and areas near the practice within the target: They would appear in the ad and capture that 'local' feel: For this, we would need a list from the client of neighborhood names and districts to include.

One additional thought for potential recommendation is within the Emergency group. This group saw no conversions in October; despite spending $277.42 for the month. It has historically seen lower volume. This could be due to the limited hours offered at this location: My understanding is that these hours are going to change, but if Emergency spots are not really available, would halt bidding on them for Ads and just allow General and Dental Implants to perform: This account could potentially benefit from a more diversified marketing plan: We currently run some Facebook ads, and could potentially look into enhancing those. A postcard is in development; which could help gain some awareness. There may be further options to explore with this account and the surrounding campaigns.

# Setting up Conversion Tracking

In general, a conversion is when someone uses your advertisement to actually buy your product or service. In online sales, we can see that someone clicks an ad, then buys a product. However, in the dental field, it is very difficult to track whether this advertisement actually caused a person to walk in the door: Sometimes a person will click to our website, click to schedule, but then miss their appointment for whatever reason. As the connection between a click and patient status gets further separated, it becomes difficult to see whether this is a true conversion. We can get extremely close to this true number by tracking a few metrics: the number of phone calls associated with an advertisement through a person clicking the 'Call Now' button on an advertisement; or the click rate on the 'Schedule Now' button on an advertisement:

There are several tools available for setting up and tracking conversions, and Google Tag Manager is one of the larger ones. This tool is great because it includes options for tracking both organic and paid traffic. This route requires a piece of code placed in both the header and body tags of the website in order to attach it to the Tag Manager that you are setting up. From there, I'll be able to define what you want to track and when you want to track it:
---
instance, if you care about clicks on a specific button, you'll designate that you want Tag Manager to report when someone clicks and where they came from (Google Ads, Organic, etc).

Before you begin tracking; you'll want to decide what it is you care most about and the channels you are currently using to reach the goals of your site: Having these goals laid out beforehand will help you in setting up conversions that are tracked well from start to finish:

# Google Ads and Group Branding

Many dentists are starting to purchase multiple practices and building regional groups under the same brand name: When this happens, there are special opportunities that start to open up in the brand and digital marketing space. Regional DSOs (Dental Service Organizations) are a great way to canvas a large area and dominate across multiple local markets.

That being said, one location is not always equal to the next. One location might be a 12-chair clinic with 4 doctors, and the other might be a small 3-chair operation. While one is doing over $4 Million in revenue each year; the other might be struggling to reach $600,000. The same goes for their strength in Google Ads. One might be performing well as the other struggles. If you're not careful, your own locations may start to compete against themselves, driving up costs for you on the advertising side.

One way to combat this is by combining all of your locations into one single Google Ad Account: Each location would then be broken into a separate campaign with its own target radius. By doing so, the system understands that campaigns can overlap, but won't fight for the impression share of the others. You can also compare your various target areas next to each other to ensure you aren't overlapping into another location's radius.

Another advantage of combining your locations into one account is the flexibility of keywords and negative keywords that can be added at the account level, or the campaign level: You'll find that managing multiple campaigns within one account is much more efficient than managing multiple accounts pointing to the same dental group. And for those wary of invoices for accounting purposes, Google makes it easy to download invoices for separate locations - no math necessary:
---
# Facebook Advertising

Facebook paid ads are a great way to push your brand in front of a specific target audience to create recognition, likeability, and conversions for your dental practice. There are multiple forms of Facebook paid advertising available, each focused on achieving a specific goal for your business. This allows you flexibility in the avenues you take for your advertising, as well as the ad format and specifics of your target audience. It's also a great foundation to apply digital ad testing to determine what type of ad approach will work best to achieve the objectives you are seeking:

# Setting Up a Facebook Campaign

Facebook offers a number of avenues for advertisers and businesses to utilize for advertising: Ads can be run through a business page, or a business manager: The business page is a quick solution for getting an ad out on your social media profile. For those looking for a more in-depth, advanced approach, there is Ads Manager; which can be found within the Business Manager platform. For the purposes of this section, we will solely be focusing on the Ads Manager tool, as this is the best option for a complete digital advertising approach.

Ads Manager is set up similarly to Google Ads in the structure of how you build an overall campaign. This is broken down into Campaigns, Ad Sets, and Ads. Campaigns are the larger picture, where most of the setup is done, and hold the Ad Sets. Ad Sets are Facebook's version of Ad Groups. Basically, they hold ads, targeting options, budgets and other settings. Overall, Facebook walks you through the process from start to finish, making it fairly seamless to complete and launch a campaign even with little or no experience.

|Campaigns|Selected|Ad Sets|Selected|Ads for Ad Set|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Delivery|Ad Set Name|Bid Strategy|Budget|Last Significant Attribution Results|
|Active|Office Fees Ad|Using campaign|7-day click|1,897|
|Results from ad| |7-day click|1,097|27,223|
| | | |84,071| |
---
# Choosing a Budget

Selecting your budget for Facebook doesn't need to be a complex process. A good general starting point that works well for most markets is $500 per month or $16.45 per day. Be realistic about your goals and how much you are willing to spend on acquiring a patient. Consider your targeting, radius, and market size to know if you may need to spend more or less money. Budget can be increased, decreased or eliminated easily and in real-time. So if you find that one budget isn't working or performing extremely well, it's always available for editing and revision.

# Understanding Your Target Audience

Before you begin your Facebook advertising journey, you'll want to spend some time thinking through who it is you want to target. Who you target is much deeper than a simple demographic profile. Think through what they like and don't like. Where do they shop? How much money do they earn? Which neighborhoods do they live in? Do they have any hobbies? If so, what are they? By taking the time up front to build a complete profile, you'll have a roadmap for how you approach the rest of your campaign. Quite honestly, one of the biggest advantages of Facebook is that it allows more specific targeting of the user and their profile.

For example, a teeth whitening campaign on Facebook should be targeted differently than a general dentistry push. Teeth whitening is a cosmetic procedure that is not covered by insurance. You would want to target individuals with disposable income, who live in a certain radius of the practice, and have shown interest in cosmetic procedures and lifestyle choices. Based on this, we could say those with a household income of $100,000 or more, attend the gym regularly, have an interest in nail/hair salons, and live within 10 miles of your practice could reasonably be considered in this demographic. We could even narrow it down further to women only, if you have data to support that women are the ones you primarily see for this procedure.

Your approach may vary per campaign. For example, if you are seeking a large net of brand awareness, you may broaden your audience and run a campaign focused on gaining website traffic. If you are looking for conversions to a specialty service, like teeth whitening, you may broaden your audience even further. Alternatively, if you are seeking to fill your schedule with more emergency dental patients, you will narrow your audience significantly as people are unlikely to travel over a certain distance for these services. And finally, if you are seeking more long-term patients for general dental and all dental services, you will only target your local area and possibly some of the surrounding communities. You can choose to be as in-depth or wide reaching as you'd like, but keep in mind that not all audiences align with all services. It's important to know the psychological and demographic makeup of the audience that provides the highest return for a particular service before you invest in digital paid advertising so you don't throw money down the drain.

During the targeting process, you'll also want to consider the placement of your ad, and the imagery you plan on conveying. Placements are exactly what they sound like: where your ad is placed on Facebook. These include newsfeeds, stories, marketplace postings, and others. We've found that newsfeeds on both Facebook and Instagram are beneficial for most purposes.
---
Once you have your target audience, think of what their newsfeed could look like. Choose imagery and messaging that fits seamlessly within their newsfeeds, and build out the ads to match what they would like to see.

# Measuring and Tracking

Facebook offers a range of conversions and measurement options based on your goals. If you're wanting to drive people to the site, you could choose the "Traffic Campaign" option as your goal. If you want to get leads, there's an option for that as well: These goal outlines can change in the Facebook interface quite quickly, so there may be a range of 6-10 options to choose from at any given time. In the end, don't overthink your strategy: Focus on delivering the service you have promised with a high-quality ad and an emphasis on a positive site experience.

# Utilizing Facebook Pixels

The Facebook Pixel is a small piece of code that hooks your Facebook account to your website to track visitors and gather data. It is similar to Google Tag Manager: By setting up your Pixel, you are able to designate visitors into groups for retargeting; gather information on demographics, and better execute marketing campaigns and strategies across your site and pages. While Pixel is a great tool, it will most likely take the help of an ad specialist to execute at a high level. However, for most of us dentists, it is a good idea to be holding our ad developers accountable and making sure they are using these tools at a high level.

Online paid search advertising is a powerful tool to help gain brand awareness, or to target specific services you offer in the practice. As we have shown in this chapter, the main two platforms to optimize are Google Ads and Facebook Ads, but of course there might be more in the future as the internet changes.

As the landscape of this online marketplace changes, it is important to remember that a book of this size is not meant to be the authoritative source on ads and how to execute. Almost no print medium is appropriate for these platforms due to their ever-evolving nature. If you really want to get a deep education on these items, it will most likely take many hours and lots of online paid education to get up to speed. If you are a dentist, this advertising investigation is a poor use of time. To execute these ad campaigns at a high level is a full-time job for ad specialists, and so as a dentist, your time is better spent doing actual dental procedures. We hope that at least with the knowledge given here, you can hold your ad specialists accountable and help to make sure you are using your budget correctly to keep yourself busy with the dentistry.

# Notes

119
---
120
---
# Chapter 6

# Social Media

Social media is all the rage, both in the stock market and on our mobile devices. Ever since Facebook was created, new platforms have popped up almost monthly to try to capture more of our attention, our screens, and our wallets. While we already introduced advertising in the previous chapter; we will now address why this tool is important and how to utilize it in everyday use to benefit your practice.

The biggest reason that social media is important is that most patients can be found on social media in some way or another: Of course, these patients and potential new patients will only acknowledge your content if it is engaging and interesting to them. So it is important to talk, engage, and share your story on these platforms in a creative and unique way: Social media is also an important medium to spark additional brand awareness and keep your brand top-of-mind for patients looking to make the switch to a new dental practice. Although not as crucial for practices located in small communities with little competition, social media is an important aspect of marketing for most practices whether they are looking to grow or not:

# Which Ones to Target?

The biggest factor to consider when deciding which platforms to be present on is where your target demographic is located. Determine where these potential new patients spend their time and invest in establishing yourself and your practice on those platforms.

Most general dental practices' target demographic is women between the ages of 30-50 years old. For this reason, using Facebook to market can be an extremely valuable tool: Marketing through Facebook will typically pull in more "unqualified" leads; however; this is still beneficial and will help to expand your reach:

Qualified leads are people who are possible candidates to purchase something from your company: In the dental space, this would be someone who lives in your city and might be in the market to actually switch to or join your dental practice. Unqualified leads are people who are
---
geographically separated from you, or who do not need to buy what you are selling: This would include people who see your post but live too far away; or possibly someone who already has dentures or doesn't need your dental services.

There are many other platforms that can be useful, but the current return-on-investment in Facebook is at such a significantly higher level that other platforms are not usually worth exploring for most practice owners. As times change, Instagram, Pinterest, TikTok and others might become more significant players for many dentists.

# Facebook is great for a few key reasons:

- Showcase your staff; brand, and core values
- Reaches core demographic: Women 30-50yrs old
- Another way to help direct people to your website Remember more website Traffic equals increased production
- Gives a personality and identity to the doctors and team
- Results in high quantity visits with only small fee (if doing paid advertising)
- More general patients (hygiene or cleanings)

It is important to remember that people don't go onto Facebook looking to make purchases. In order to gain new patients from these Facebook posts, you will need to target pain points, have a proper call to action, and use quality visuals in your posts.

# Boost Posts vs. Paid Ads

There are two primary Facebook posting strategies that can be used to benefit your practice. Since we have already addressed paid advertising in the previous chapter; we will now focus on organic posts.

As dentists, our organic posts will often not get a lot of traction, so it is important to use both paid ads and unpaid posts together to reach and engage potential new patients, as well as your existing patient base.

Remember that our organic posts may have differing goals.

- Reach = expanding brand
- Engagement = likes, comments, greater chance of purchasing product/services

Also, remember that boosting a post is not the same as an advertisement: Boosting a post will still only be visible to your friends and friends-of-friends, while advertisements are visible to people who are in your target audience. According to Facebook:
---
When you boost a post; it'll show up in your audience's Facebook News Feed as an ad. You can also select Instagram as an ad placement for your boosted post. You can choose a post that's already present on your page's timeline and boost it by following only a few steps. When you boost a post you'll tell us 3 things:

1. Who you want to reach: you'll pick a target audience of the type of people you want to connect with.
2. Your max budget: tell us exactly how much you want to spend over the course of your entire campaign.
3. How long you want to run your ad: once you click Boost and your ad is approved, people in your target audience will see your ad in their news feed for the duration you've set.

Boosting Facebook posts means turning the post into an ad only visible in the news feed. This improves visibility and engagement with the post with relatively little expense. Here are some tips for boosting posts:

- Boost unique posts - only the most unique content you think will gain traction.
- Be aware that your post will not reach your entire following unless you boost the post.
- Less than 15% of what you post will go to people who like your page unless it hits a high popularity number.
- Facebook is currently the cheapest platform to market on.
- Typically, when you pay $40-70 per boost; it can work very well.
- If your posts aren't getting likes, fewer people will see your future content; so DO NOT POST MORE FREQUENTLY if you are not getting many likes.
- You can narrow in on your target demographic/market to a high degree.

# How this Boosting a post differs from paid ads:

1. Ability to choose different ad placements. With a boosted post; you have the ability to place your ad on Instagram and Facebook mobile/desktop News Feed. With Facebook ads, you get the added benefit of choosing placements in Facebook News Feed side ads, Messenger ads, Instagram stories, instant articles, and Audience Network.
2. Specific ad objectives. Boosted posts allow you to focus on website clicks, page engagement and local business promotions. Creating a paid ad allows you to choose objectives like store traffic, conversions, and lead generation.
---
# 3

Additional creative options only available in paid ads. Some unique features include carousel ads, specific descriptions, and a call-to-action button that will drive more of your audience to take action.

# 4

Advanced targeting capabilities. Ad targeting is performed based on interests, gender, and age through boosting posts. With Facebook ads, you can use more advanced tools to create overlapping audience types, lookalike audiences, and more.

More likes on posts will increase visibility without needing to boost; however, this is likely not attainable if your page has a small following.

# Types of Posts

Remember that social media functions to improve branding, show some personality, and offers you an online billboard to spread your messages to the community. Even though social media posts have the ability to accomplish all of these things, many posts will focus on optimizing one or two of these areas:

# Strategy #1: Social Media Posting Sample Calendar

It may seem as though any time is a good time for a social media post; but there can be a sneaky science behind the timing of each post. When posting, there are specific goals you should set for each post. In the same way, there are also some rules with your posting that you should follow:

The best strategy to use when dividing up types of posts is to create a calendar and have all your posts prepared and timed for maximum impact. Companies who use social media well do not just 'take a picture and post;' they meticulously plan out the text, the image, and the goal of each post. In order to successfully execute this strategy, we suggest creating a calendar outlining these posts quarterly so that you are planned out up to 3 months in advance.
---
Here is an example of what CMOShare does to help dentists with their posts:

|APRIL|APRIL|APRIL|APRIL|
|---|
|1st|5th|7th|12th|
|FOOLS Day Happy April Fools Day! We hope your oreos are free of toothpaste pranks today: Who do you think is the best prankster in our office?|Hygienists Week Today is the start of Hygienists Week! We are so lucky to have the best hygiene team around and hope they feel the love this week (and every week!)|Our Service We’re proud to provide our patients with top notch service!|Video Doctor talking about causes of sensitive teeth; treatment, etc. Loose Script: Hello everybody! Dr. here wanted to share with you the causes and treatments of sensitive teeth.|
|15th|21st|24th|26th|
|No caption|Administrative Professionals Day Happy Administrative Professionals Day! We couldn’t run this office without you and hope you know how much we appreciate your hard work.|Oral Health During the Flu Got the flu? Here are ways to take care of your mouth when you're feeling under the weather: - Choose Sugar-Free Cough Drops - Stay Hydrated to Avoid Dry Mouth - Practice Good Hygiene - Change Your Toothbrush|True or False How well do you know? Out of the following three statements; ONE IS A LIE. Which one do you think is the lie? 1. I grew up on a farm (LIE) 2. I have dyed my hair pink 3. I had a TikTok go viral|

What is the best frequency of posting?

From what we have seen work in the most successful practices, it is important to post at least 1-2 times per week to prevent the business page from going stale. However, posting too frequently could give the opportunity for people to get burnt out on seeing your content and interacting with your posts. To keep your posts fresh and interesting, only post when your content is unique and do not post every day: Quality is absolutely more important than quantity.

# Strategy #2: Using Different Types of Posts

In general, we will categorize posts into a few specific areas, where some of these are edited and some are raw/organic:

- Doctor & Team personality posts
---
These can be raw and unedited photography; however; the text needs to be succinct and build a connection between the doctor/team member and the audience.

These posts will be specifically about non-dental things, including the doctor's personal life, interests, and activities. This is a great way to connect with patients who have similar interests, which will make those patients more likely to 'like' you and your post.

Similarly, posting about team members can be a great way to generate traffic because team members will often share these posts and appreciate being recognized. The more often you post pictures of team members smiling; the more likely these posts are to gain traction.

# Capital Dental

June               May 4

Some people think we're crazy because we like teeth: (We think it's cool?)

BUT Dr. Addison Killeen is truly crazy - he rode 206 miles last weekend on gravel/dirt/rocky roads in Kansas for 16.5 hrs! He took a few pictures on the ride. Is that safe to be doing?

Gclist 2021 +2

2 Comments 2 Shares

# Clinical or Service-Oriented Posts

These can be either raw or highly polished. If it is a picture of the doctor at a weekend course, then raw pictures are acceptable. However; if it's a picture of a service showing a clinical outcome, then some graphic design is needed to help make sure the picture is high quality and gains attention quickly:

These posts can often be about services that you offer; or specific clinical things that you see in the practice. While these posts might not gain a lot of traction, they can be very powerful in confirming a buying decision from a potential patient. In the case where you want to build yourself up to be an esthetic doctor; posting each of your large esthetic cases will be a good strategy to help establish yourself as the expert in this area.
---
# Capital Dental

# June 30

# Did you know?

Dr. Aadison Killeen and team visited Scottsdale Arizona a few weeks ago where Peyton Manning was the keynote speaker at the Dental Success Summit: It is the annual large conference with over 500 in attendance where Dr. Killeen coaches and connects with clients from across the country.

#springtraining has a whole new meaning!

|764|70|+1.0x average|Boost post| |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|People reached|Engagements|Distribution score| | |
|23|32|Like|Comment|Share|
|High-Traffic Posts (Giveaways & Questions)|These posts can be either raw or highly polished and edited. Regardless, the entire goal is to just drive likes, comments, and shares.| | | |
|These types of posts are often used to help drive traffic to the post and can be associated with a giveaway or question. The more people comment; then the more likely that other people will see this post in their newsfeed and have the opportunity to like or comment on the post. Crafting unique contests will help drive more traffic to a post; although Facebook's algorithm is starting to identify these posts and limit traffic.| | | | |
---
# Capital Dental

Published by Addison Killeen February 11

Oacbe: at 6.14 AM

# Win 2 Tickets to the Husker-Michigan game this weekend!

Who would win a hotdog eating contest between Herbie Husker and Lil' Red? Answer that in the comments below and we will pick a winner on Wednesday! Correct guesses will be entered to win a YETI filled with goodies!

CINci PROPERTY

L 2

RanS

48 Comments Share

Like Comment Share

# Brand, Team and Core Value Posts

These are very important to drive awareness to the practice. These posts often do not need much creative spirit; but posting pictures of your team, your practice, and your company's core values can be extremely beneficial for generating brand awareness. Oftentimes when you have actual faces in the picture, your posts will get much more traction than any other general pictures of the office.

# Capital Dental

August 6

We're loving the Olympics right now—and if flossing was a sport we would win gold! For a chance to win our new special edition shirt—What’s your favorite sport to watch?

# Capital Dental

August

Just an appreciation post for the best team around!

Comments Share 28 Comments Share

Like Comment Share
---
# Holiday & Informational Posts

These are often highly edited content that looks nice. While these are more often very normal posts, they are still important to mix up the types of content shown on your page: It can often be useful to post when you will be observing a holiday or change in schedule, as patients might look to Facebook to see if you're open or not.

As part of strategy, make sure to keep up on all the unusual holidays like your Administrative Professionals Day (April 27th), National Dental Hygiene Month (October), and National Dentist Day (March 6th): Having fun pictures on days like these are engaging and can be fun:

# Capital Dental

June 20

Happy Father’s Day to all the dads, grandpas and father figures. You guys rock!

# NATIONAL TOOTHACHE DAY

# CAPITAL DENTAL

70                      Comment Share

# Quick Recap

Switch up types of posts each week and month:

1. Doctor and Team Personality posts
2. Clinical or Service-oriented posts
3. High-traffic posts (Giveaways and Questions)
4. Brand, Team and Core Value posts
5. Holiday and Informational posts

129
---
# Strategy #3: Do Not Post when Posts get Little Traction

Posting on social media can be a fickle game where some posts seem like they would be great content but do not gain any traction. Others might seem mundane but catch fire and get seen by thousands of people. In general, it is very difficult to try to figure out why this happens. However, we do suggest a few 'rules' that you should follow to help ensure that your posts on any social media platform will continue to be relevant and timely:

If your posts are not getting much traction, you should look to the root cause of the issue. If you do not have many page likes, then it might be normal to not have much engagement with your posts. In this case, work hard to try to generate more 'page likes' to increase the number of people who will possibly see the post. However, even if you are caught with a small number of likes, typically posts should garner some sort of visibility with good content:

If your posts still gain very little traction, then posting frequently will actually hurt your page. Do not keep posting similar content if there is no interaction, since Facebook and other platforms will see this and actually start to decrease your 'reach'. This will hurt you in the long run and diminish your future ability to reach people on those platforms.

The biggest takeaway regarding social media is that it is an extremely important tool in today's market. Doctors who use social media well are more successful and can acquire new patients with very little cost per acquisition. These doctors also experience more success in dictating their ideal new patients because they are advertising for the 'right' kind of patient. As a tactical point, the doctors who use social media well also mix up their posts with different content and styles to keep the page interesting and fresh:

# Common Question

Question: Are Facebook, Instagram and other social media platforms a good way to get new patients?

Answer: Social media should mainly be viewed as a brand awareness platform. While Google Analytics data shows you will get some conversions from social platforms, it is commonly low numbers of conversions. Typically, less than 1 percent of all traffic from social media to your site will convert. However, social media is a way to create brand awareness to a targeted audience through ads, and it is a way to create connection points with those who already like you.
---
# Chapter 7

# Internal Marketing

Many small businesses, including dental practices, primarily think of marketing as external elements such as advertisements, website, Google, social media and other marketing strategies outside of the practice. However, marketing to your current patients is often an overlooked item:

As you develop a comprehensive marketing plan, internal marketing is a pivotal component of a successful marketing strategy:

Internal marketing tactics include a wide range of items and should focus on furthering your brand awareness, educating patients on the services you offer; increasing treatment acceptance percentage, and creating an exceptional patient experience. Internal marketing, at its core, focuses on retaining and fully serving current patients primarily through email, direct mail, and touch points before, during, and after office visits. When you take this approach with current patients, you are optimizing your practice's potential to increase production and generate new patients.

Taking internal marketing seriously will improve a few metrics:

- Increased retention of patients
- Increased case acceptance percentages (by dollars spent and overall percentage)
- Increased internal referrals of new patients by existing patients
- Increased spending by patients each year

To take a comprehensive look at internal marketing, we will break the subsets into the following parts, and then we will begin with an exercise to help us identify opportunities:

- Internal Branding on all paperwork, including digital paperwork
- Patient Experience
- Decor; design and smells
- Scripting for understanding and experience
- Patient Giveaways both Daily and Monthly
- Email Blasts - End of Year, Procedure Specific
- Special Procedure Days - Invisalign
---
# Whitening Specials

# Authority Wall

# Membership Plans

# Thank You Cards

# Signage

# TV Slides in-office

# Follow the Patient

Within the Dental Success Network and Dental Success Institute, we often perform the exercise called 'Follow the Patient'. This follows the patient throughout the entire appointment process to see where there are opportunities for internal marketing, scripting, and patient experience. To help better understand how to maximize your internal marketing, we've included the strategy used by Capital Dental (Dr: Killeen's practice) from a new patient's perspective. We will go step-by-step through the process below:

# To begin, we start with the first digital communication.

Once the patient schedules their appointment; we consider any subsequent communication with them to fall under the internal marketing strategy:

# Appointment Reminder

- Patient receives an appointment reminder via text and email.
- This reminder includes online links to the new patient paperwork, medical history, and any other forms they need to sign.
- The patient receives confirmation their paperwork has been completed.

# Notes

Ensure the paperwork is branded correctly with your name and logo like the digital example to the right.

# Patient Arrives for Appointment

When the patient arrives at the office, they see the Capital Dental signage on the building: This sign matches the branding and logo as seen on the website, Google Business Profile, paperwork; etc.
---
Once inside, they are greeted by an office staff member: This greeting is important as it is the first in-person touch point with the office and brand.

The waiting room "look" matches that of what they saw online and/or in any other marketing pieces.

While waiting for their appointment in the lobby; they see books and magazines on Lincoln, Nebraska. This supports the Smile Lincoln branding campaign:

# CAPITAL DENTAL

There is a television in the corner of the waiting room with a custom slideshow about the doctors, team members, and services offered in the practice.

# Notes

- Ensure your signage is clear and matches that of your overall brand.
- Your staff should be using consistent verbiage for new patients during check-in.
- Any paperwork in the office that is given out needs to be custom and branded.

# Patient Treatment Experience

When the patient is called back to their appointment they are greeted by a member of the team: The team member is wearing a custom-branded t-shirt from the practice, and possibly even a branded jacket over top of that.

As the patient walks to the room, the office decor; photos, signage and other elements match that of the brand. The walk back to the treatment room should also include a 'tour' of the office, bathroom, and other pieces that display the authority of the practice.

In the room are branded materials, including brochures and other items with the Capital Dental logo and colors.

If treatment is recommended, the patient is given a custom branded brochure or handout explaining the treatment plan.

If there is a follow up appointment; the patient is given a branded appointment card:

133
---
# Notes

Keep track of any items given out to a patient; including paperwork; brochures, hygiene bags, etc, and have them customized to feature your brand if possible:

You can purchase cheap plastic bags online and place a logo sticker on the bags to make them customized at a minimal cost.

|CHILD|ADULT|ADULT PeRIO|
|---|---|---|
|Benefits|S67R~|Ceed|
|SrY'|Dacoure|Insurance?|
|46|40o|No|
|Dental worries|No|nade|
|0|5263 per Year|6269|
| |car|capi|

# Completion of Appointment

Once the appointment is completed, the patient is walked to the check out desk where a team member goes through their payment plans, follow up appointment;, and gives them a Capital Dental t-shirt if they're a new patient:

Each handoff includes the patient's name, introductions to the next team member, and building up the authority of the next team member to make sure the patient feels comfortable with this new person:

Post-op paperwork is also sent for specific codes - including extractions, implants, invisalign, and sedation. This paperwork is all branded and specific to the procedure they just had completed.

As they leave the office, some special patients are offered a gift such as a t-shirt;, a bottle of wine in a plastic bag with logo-sticker; or a customized stainless steel mug:

Smile Linc

Smile Lincoln

134
---
All of the items mentioned here would be considered touch points with the patient: These touch points are important pieces to internal marketing and patient experience. Making a checklist for a new patient, current patient or consultation appointment will help your team create a consistent experience. The Rebrand Checklist (p. 43) will also help determine what items need to be branded.

# Strategies

Now that you've gone through a mock exercise of 'follow the patient;' you might be starting to see where all the internal marketing comes into play: In truth, there is really no limit to the amount of internal marketing you can accomplish with enough energy and resources. Listed below are some of the essential internal marketing tools for your practice, some of which you saw in the exercise earlier in this chapter:

# Internal Branding on Paperwork

Appointment cards, brochures, and other paperwork are often overlooked in the practice. But when these materials look generic and cheap, patients notice. As you go through your practice and patient experience, look for any opportunity to create custom-branded paperwork to achieve a higher level of perceived service.

# Appointment Cards

Appointment cards are provided as a courtesy to patients after they schedule their next appointment: They serve as a helpful reminder for patients and can decrease the number of missed appointments your practice experiences. The cards should feature your practice's logo, names of doctor(s), practice website address and phone number; practice location(s), space to fill in the patient's name, as well as the date and time of their next appointment:

CAPITAL DENTAL

Name: ______________________

Date: ______________________

5609 S 27th St

Lincoln, Nebraska

{402} 442-0999

# Brochures

Brochures are important to internal marketing because they can increase treatment plan acceptance and help ensure the patient understands how treatment will work and why it is necessary: Brochures should be provided to the patient after the treatment plan is presented. A quality brochure should include the following components: practice logo, practice website address and phone number; names of doctor(s), practice location(s), name of the procedure and a brief explanation, space for doctor notes, and helpful images/graphics.
---
# Checklist and Examples of Brochures

# Brochure Topics List

1. Botox
2. Dental Implants
3. Digital X-Rays
4. Invisalign
5. Membership Brochures
6. Periodontal Disease
7. Root Canals
8. Sealants
9. Sleep Apnea
10. Tooth Extractions
11. Wedding Checklist
12. Post-Op Instructions
13. Crowns & Bridges
14. Cracked Tooth
15. Oral Health & Diabetes
16. TmJ
17. Full-Mouth Dental Implants
18. Dry Mouth
19. Insurance
20. Oral Sedation & IV Sedation
21. Endodontics and the importance of saving teeth
22. Veneers
23. Teeth Whitening
24. Bridge vs Dental Implants
25. Bone Grafting
26. Dry Needling
27. Pediatric Dentistry

# Examples of all Marketing Materials

There are many more brochures and examples available as downloads. Scan the QR Code or visit: WWW.mycmoshare.com/marketing-manual-supplemental
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# DENTAL PLANS FOR A PEACE OF MIND

No Dental Insurance? No worries

Amazing dental care made affordable with our dental plans.

Uninsured or questioning just how much you really save with your current dental insurance plan? For less than $1 a day, our dental savings plan gives you access to discounted services: plus free exams, X-rays, and cleanings. Call our team to start saving today!

- No yearly maximums
- No deductibles
- No claim forms
- No pre-authorization requirements
- No health questions
- No pre-existing condition limitations
- No one will be denied coverage
- No waiting periods
- Free consultations

# Membership Plans proudly accepted at:

# CARYAL CAPITAL DENTAL

Dr: Aadison Killeen

Dr: Brandon Chapek

Dr: Kelsey Sasse

5609 S. 27th St, Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com

# Benefits

|CHILD Benefits|ADULT Benefits|ADULT PERIO Benefits|
|---|---|---|
|All Exams|All Exams|All Exams|
|All X-Rays|All X-Rays|All X-Rays|
|2 Dental Cleanings per year|2 Dental Cleanings per year|3-4 Dental Cleanings per year|
|All Emergency Exams|2 Dental Emergency Exams|All Emergency Exams|
|Annual Fluoride Varnish|Annual Oral Cancer Screening|Annual Oral Cancer Screening|
| |Free Fluoride Varnish|Free Fluoride Varnish|

# Discounts

|CHILD|ADULT|ADULT PERIO|
|---|---|---|
|20% OFF Teeth Sealants|50% OFF Teeth Whitening|50% OFF Teeth Whitening|
|20% OFF Fillings|25% OFF Dental Implants|40% OFF Scaling & Root Planing|
|20% OFF all other services|25% OFF Botox|25% OFF Botox|
| |20% OFF all other services|20% OFF all other services|
| |Fillings, crowns, root canals, dentures, bridges, veneers|Fillings, crowns, root canals, dentures, dental implants, bridges, veneers|
| |preventive, restorative and cosmetic services|preventive, restorative and cosmetic services|

# Pricing

|Plan|Cost|
|---|---|
|Child Plan|$252 per year|
|Adult Plan|$288 per year|
|Adult Perio Plan|$444 per year|

Works out to be $21/month for Child Plan

Works out to be $24/month for Adult Plan

Works out to be $37/month for Adult Perio Plan
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# STRAIGHT TEETH ARE HEALTHIER

When your teeth are properly aligned, the health benefits are clear:

- Healthier Gums
- Improved Hygiene
- Less wear and trauma

Misaligned teeth can lead to premature wear, tooth loss, gum disease, and more. Invisalign can help.

It's easier to brush and floss around properly aligned teeth; you are less likely to have pockets between gums and teeth that trap bacteria.

Properly aligned teeth reduce plaque retention, tooth decay, and the risk of gum disease.

Aligned teeth reduce the risk of tooth chipping, breaking, and wear, which can require expensive procedures to repair. Proper alignment also reduces stress on jawbone and joints.

# WHAT IS MALOCCLUSION?

More facts on Invisalign:

- With its proprietary development, decades of research, and unmatched innovations, Invisalign clear aligners are by far the best option for straightening teeth.
- This is why more than a million patients have chosen Invisalign clear aligners for predictable tooth movement.
- Up to 75% more SmartTrack material, with less than braces.
- No restrictions on foods or activities.
- Now up to 50% faster with weekly aligner changes.
- Covered up to 50% by many orthodontic insurance plans.
- Easier to brush and floss for better oral health.

# ARE YOU EXPERIENCING ANY OF THE FOLLOWING?

- Edge-to-Edge Bite
- Cold Sensitivity
- Tooth chipping or wearing
- Food getting caught between teeth
- Difficulty flossing
- Self-consciousness when smiling for photos
- Biting lips, cheek, or tongue
- Indentations at the gum line
- Speech changes or lisping
- Narrow Arch
- Bad breath
- Dry mouth or mouth breathing
- Jaw muscle pain or headaches
- Receding gums

# SCHEDULE YOUR CONSULTATION TODAY

Start Invisalign in as little as 30 minutes. Starting appointment includes:

- Pictures of your teeth
- 3D scan of your teeth
- Discussion with the doctor about your concerns and what your goals are.

Doctor Notes

Dr. Addison Killeen

Dr. Brandon Chapek

Dr. Kelsey Sasse

5609 S. 27th St; Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# CARYAL CAPITAL

# Doctor Notes

# DENTAL

# Tooth Extractions

General guidelines to help healing, promote prevent complications and make you more comfortable while you recover.

Sometimes teeth need to be removed due to decay; disease of the gum. When you get a tooth pulled, it’s called an extraction. It’s natural that changes will occur in your mouth after the procedure.

Following instructions from your dental team will help make sure that your mouth heals properly after your tooth is removed. These instructions will also help to lower your risk of having any problems while your mouth heals.

# CAPITAL DENTAL

Dr: Addison Killeen

Dr: Brandon Chapek

5609 S. 27th St.

Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com

# AFTER YOUR TOOTH IS REMOVED

# DAY OF PROCEDURE

Do not clean the teeth next to the tooth socket for the rest of the healing day. You should still brush and floss your teeth. You can also brush your tongue.

# BLEEDING

Gauze pack on the extraction site limits bleeding: This will also help blood clot to promote normal healing. This gauze pack should be left in place for 60 minutes after you leave the dentist.

There may be some bleeding oozing after the pack is removed. If so, fold a piece of clean gauze into a pad thick enough to bite on. Dampen the pad with clean, warm water and place directly on the extraction site. Apply pressure by closing your teeth firmly until the pad becomes soaked with blood, replace it with a clean one.

# DAY AFTER PROCEDURE

Begin eating soft, nutritious foods. Avoid alcoholic beverages. Do not use straws.

As soon as you can chew, try to chew food on the opposite side of the extraction site for the first few days. When it feels comfortable, you should resume chewing on both sides of your mouth.

# SWELLING

Swelling and pain are normal after a tooth is removed. Swelling peaks 2 days after the procedure. To help reduce swelling and pain, try applying a cold compress to your face, like an ice pack or cold, moist cloth.

# CALL YOUR DENTIST RIGHT AWAY IF YOU HAVE:

- Fever
- Nausea & vomiting
- Ongoing severe pain or swelling
- Bleeding that gets worse with time instead of better

# PAIN MEDICATION

Take pain medication only as directed by your dentist. If your dentist has prescribed medicine to control pain and inflammation, or to prevent infection, it is important to only use as directed.

If you cannot reach your dentist, go to a hospital emergency room.
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# CAPITAL

# EASY DENTAL FINANCIAL SOLUTIONS FOR YOUR BEAUTIFUL SMILE

You deserve to feel confident about your smile: Our in-house membership plan is simple, affordable, and provides the coverage you need at a low monthly price you can afford. With our membership plan, you'll receive regular cleanings, exams, and x-rays at no additional cost. Plus, your plan includes discounts for any additional treatment you may need during the year. Dental care can fit comfortably within your budget—so you can get healthy and beautiful teeth all year long.

# HELPING YOU SAVE

Our office understands that 50% of Americans avoid visiting the dentist. We provide the most painless, relaxing, trustworthy, quick, and hassle-free experience possible. We know how important it is to feel comfortable at the dentist, especially for those without insurance. Let us take the pressure off, so you can leave with a smile every time.

# CAPITAL DENTAL'S MEMBERSHIP PLAN

|SIMPLE|SIMPLE|AFFORDABLE|COMPREHENSIVE|
|---|---|---|
|Adult Membership|$5345|Paying Out Of Pocket|$5508 Today|
|Benefits Start Immediately|Waiting Period|6 - 12 Months|Services|
|Dental Cleanings Year|All Exams (Even Emergency Exams)|X-Rays|50% OFF Fluoride Varnish|
|Excludes Coverage of|Always Covers Missing Teeth Options|Existing Tooth Loss|Free|

Budget-friendly alternative to Medicare. Benefits start immediately. Discounts for any additional treatment you may need during the year.

# SCAN HERE TO LEARN MORE

Dr. Addison Killeen

Dr. Brandon Chapek

Dr. Kelsey Sasse

5609 S. 27th St, Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# CARYAL

# CAPITAL

# BETTER SLEEP MEANS BETTER HEALTH:

Sleep apnea is a condition that causes a person to experience frequent recurring shortness of breath while sleeping. Signs include poor sleeping habits, frequent sore throats, recurring headaches, and more.

Not only does it affect your body's ability to get a restful night of sleep, but it can also hurt your health:

# CAPITAL DENTAL

Dr: Addison Killeen

Dr: Brandon Chapek

5609 S 27th St

Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com

# SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

The most common symptoms of sleep apnea are listed below. Just because you have one or a few of these, doesn’t mean you have sleep apnea:

- Very loud snoring
- Sleepiness and loss of energy when awake
- Pain or headaches
- Restless sleep
- Insomnia
- Recurrent awakenings
- Waking up with a sore throat
- Waking up in the night with gasping or choking sensations
- Sudden mood changes
- Poor concentration
- Going to the bathroom frequently at night

# RISKS IF LEFT UNTREATED

The side effects of sleep apnea are real. It is a serious condition with risks to your health. Sleep apnea can lead to an increased risk of stroke, heart disease, cancer, insulin resistance, gastric reflux, weight gain, high blood pressure, heart attacks, and even can be deadly.

# HOW IT WORKS

Oral sleep appliances help patients get the rest they need. By holding the lower jaw in position while you sleep, your airway is allowed to open up. This can help lessen snoring and enable better breathing, resulting in a more restful night of sleep for everybody in the room.
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# YOUR CAPITAL DENTAL

# BRIGHTEST SMILE FOR YOUR BIGGEST DAY:

Congratulations on your engagement! The excitement is brewing: you might have a long list of to-dos like finding a venue, booking entertainment, and getting a great photographer, but don't forget one of the most important pieces - enhancing your smile. Not only will you be taken from your countless photos during the engagement, but you will also be in close contact with all of your friends and family. Make sure your smile is picture perfect!

We've put together a plan leading up to your unforgettable day. Not all steps are necessary, but a combination of the steps below undoubtedly gives you that smile upgrade you will remember for a lifetime:

# TIMELINE TO Your Best Smile

# FACTS ON INVISALIGN

With proprietary innovations and decades of research and development, Invisalign clear aligners are unmatched by any other clear aligner system. This is why more than a million patients have chosen to straighten their teeth with Invisalign clear aligners:

- Up to 75% more predictable tooth movement with SmartTrack material for the smile you expect
- Less painful treatment process
- No restrictions on foods or activities
- Now up to 50% faster with weekly aligner changes
- Covered up to 50% by many orthodontic insurance plans
- Easier to brush and floss for better oral health

# SCHEDULE YOUR CONSULTATION TODAY

Clear aligners, Clear Results

# IN-OFFICE WHITENING

Engagement Photos

# SCHEDULE YOUR ANNUAL CLEANING

Save the Date

# Repair Your Smile

For chipped teeth

# WhiteNing Touch UP

In-Office Whitening

Your Day! YOU LOOK GREAT!
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# GET A BRIGHTER, WHITER SMILE:

Your smile is one of the first things that people notice when they meet you: Straight, white teeth are no longer just for celebrities. Advancements in cosmetic dentistry over the last several years have made teeth whitening safer and more affordable for almost anyone wanting a brighter smile.

# CARYAAL CAPITAL DENTAL

At Capital Dental, we offer various teeth whitening options either by appointment in our office or take-home whitening kits which use a custom tray fitted to your mouth filled with whitening gel. All within the comfort of your own home:

Du Addison Killeen

Dr. Brandon Chapek

Dr. Kelsey Sasse

5609 S. 27th St.

Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com

# WORDS OF ADVICE

If you have sensitive teeth that last after a whitening session, do NOT continue whitening; give it a couple of days & week break until the sensitivity returns to normal. Then continue until you are happy with the color of your teeth.

# WHITENING OPTIONS

|Step|Take-Home|In-Office|
|---|---|---|
|1|Express one dot of gel halfway up the tray from the back in the corners of the mouth. Usually for 6-8 teeth.|Custom fabricated trays.|
|2|Dry off your tissues and teeth as much as possible; insert the tray into your mouth and lightly press it against the sides of your teeth.|2 Hour Visit In-Office with Opalescence Jumpstart.|
|3|Remove and clean the tray using a toothbrush, gently clear any excess gel off your teeth and gums.|What To Expect In-Office: Impressions for Custom trays week prior to appointment.|
|4|Store tray in its designated case. You may experience significant sensitivity; stop using sensitivity toothpaste until you feel better.|High-power gel used with high precision.|

# SCHEDULE A VISIT WITH US TODAY!

We make teeth whitening easy: Our options have perfected scientifically designed application protocol, delivering exceptional results.
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# CAPITAL DENTAL

# CHECK ON THE HEALTH OF YOUR TEETH:

Computers are part of daily life. They also play an important role in our dental office. We use computers to track your appointments, treatment details, and insurance records. We also use them to capture, store, and transmit your dental X-ray images.

Our practice uses digital X-rays because they have many benefits over film X-rays. Digital X-ray images can be simpler to make, provide enhanced pictures, and can save time for the dental team. They also make it easier for us to show these images to you, our patient.

# Why Do We Take X-Rays?

There are many benefits to using digital dental X-ray images:

- When the digital X-ray image is exposed, it can be sent directly to a computer and viewed right away.
- Digital X-ray images can be enlarged on the computer screen. This makes it much easier for you and the dentist to see the pictures.
- Digital X-ray images can often be corrected without having to take another X-ray exposure.
- The dental office can print digital X-ray images. They can also be sent electronically to insurance companies, which may help claims get processed faster.
- Digital X-ray images are environmentally friendly. They eliminate the need for film and film processing chemicals.
- Digital X-ray images may require less radiation.

# Why Are Dental X-Rays Needed?

Many diseases of the oral cavity (which includes the teeth and surrounding tissues and bone) cannot be seen when the dentist examines your mouth. An X-ray exam helps the dentist see:

- Fillings
- Decay between the teeth or bone damage from an infection
- Bone loss due to gum disease
- Developmental defects
- Some types of tumors
- The effects of trauma
- The position of unerupted teeth

Finding and treating dental problems at an early stage can save time, money, and unneeded discomfort and help prevent more serious health problems. X-ray images may be able to help the dentist detect damage and disease not visible during regular dental exams.

# Are Dental X-Rays Safe?

Dental X-ray exams require very low levels of radiation, which makes the risk of potentially harmful effects very small. For example, the radiation from a bitewing X-ray image creates only a fraction of the radiation you are exposed to when flying on an airplane. Dental practices take steps to limit the body's exposure to radiation:

- Limiting the size of the X-ray beam to the size of the film or sensor being used.
- Using a leaded apron and thyroid shield that X-rays cannot pass through.

# How Are Digital Dental X-Ray Images Made?

Digital imaging uses an X-ray machine like that used for traditional dental X-ray images made with film. But instead of using film in a plastic holder, digital images are made using a small electronic sensor that is placed in your mouth to capture the X-ray image.
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# ROOT

# CARYAL

# CAPITAL

# CANALS

# Doctor Notes

# DENTAL

# Root Canals

Save your infected or injured tooth through root canal treatments.

# SAVE TEETH:

Your teeth are meant to last a lifetime. Years ago, diseased or injured teeth were often pulled or extracted. Today, even if the pulp inside one of your teeth is injured or infected, the tooth often can be saved through root canal (endodontic) treatment.

Endodontics (end-0-DON-tics) is the branch of dentistry that deals with treating diseases or injuries to the dental pulp. An endodontist is a dentist who specializes in root canal and other endodontic treatments. If you have a tooth with a more intense or complicated treatment, your dentist may refer you to an endodontist.

# HOW LONG WILL THE RESTORED TOOTH LAST?

A tooth with a root canal can last for years. Teeth with root canals, however, can become decayed, fractured, or get gum disease, just like any other teeth. Daily cleaning and regular exams will help you keep your teeth healthy, whether they've had root canals or not.

# WHAT HAPPENS IF THE DENTAL PULP IS INJURED?

The pulp is the soft tissue inside the tooth that contains blood vessels and nerves. When the pulp is diseased or injured and unable to repair itself, it dies. The most common causes of pulp death are cracked tooth, deep cavity, problems with large fillings, or serious injury to the tooth. All of these can allow bacteria to enter into the pulp.

# WHAT MATERIALS ARE USED FOR THE CROWN?

Crowns can be made from several materials. The type chosen depends on where the tooth is located in your mouth, the amount of natural tooth left, your preferences, and your dentist's judgment about what is best for you.

# Why Does THE PULP NEED TO BE REMOVED?

If the problem pulp is not removed, the tissues around the root of the tooth can become infected, often resulting in pain and swelling. Even if there is no pain, bacteria can damage the bone that anchors the tooth in the jaw. Without treatment, the tooth may have to be pulled, which is likely to cause bone density issues down the road if the site is left with missing tooth.

Dr: Addison Killeen

Dr: Brandon Chapek

Dr: Keisey Sasse

5609 S. 27th St:

Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# ORAL HYGIENE AND YOUR HEALTH:

Your oral health is connected to your overall health:

Periodontal disease is an infection of the tissues that surround and support your teeth. The infection unfortunately results in periodontal disease being referred to as gum disease.

Once periodontal disease is treated and controlled, it can be completely cured.

# Three Convenient QuadCity Locations to Serve You!

|Prescott|919 12th PI #7, Prescott, AZ|(928) 772-9860|
|---|---|---|
|Chino Valley|432 W Butterfield Rd, Chino Valley, AZ|(928) 636-1565|
|Prescott Valley|7890 E Florentine Rd, Prescott Valley, AZ|(928) 770-5721|

HorizonDDS.com

# YOUR ORAL HEALTH

Many people worry about dental decay and cavities. However, another major concern is having a strong foundation of healthy gum tissue and bone. Without this support, teeth can be lost due to periodontal disease. The US Surgeon General states that this disease affects 48% of adults in the United States.

Even more concerning is the connection that periodontal disease has with other serious diseases such as:

- Heart disease and heart attacks
- Diabetic complications (Diabetics are 3 times more likely to develop periodontal disease)
- Stroke
- Premature and stillborn babies
- Difficulty conceiving
- Progression and initiation of AIDS
- Pancreatic cancer
- Prostate cancer

As with decay, our goal is to prevent the first signs of periodontal disease. Ideally, when infection is present, we aim to diagnose and manage it early. Our focus is just the health of your mouth. We hope this brochure helps you understand your status.

# LEVELS OF DISEASE

|Healthy|0 Points|
|---|---|
|No bleeding|Less than 3 Points|
|Gingivitis|4 Points|
|Early Periodontitis|48 Points|
|Moderate Periodontitis|50-54 Points|
|Severe Periodontitis|55 Points and above|

This is meant to be a guide only and does not render a diagnosis. A diagnosis will be made by a qualified dentist.
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# ADD HORIZONa #HORIZON DENTAE GR

# Doctor Notes

# Dental Implants

When teeth are lost because of disease or accident; dental implants may be a good option for your smile.

Dental implants are surgically placed posts into the upper or lower jawbone. They replace one or more teeth that are next to each other. Implants are an effective way to replace missing natural teeth.

# Three Convenient Quad City Locations to Serve You!

|Prescott|919 12th PI #7, Prescott, AZ|(928) 772-9860|
|---|---|---|
|Chino Valley|432 W Butterfield Rd, Chino Valley, AZ|(928) 636-1565|
|Prescott Valley|7890 E Florentine Rd, Prescott Valley, AZ|(928) 770-5721|

# WHAT IS A DENTAL IMPLANT?

Dental implants are titanium fixtures surgically fastened to your jawbone, onto which artificial teeth can be mounted. Over several months, implants fuse to your bone through a process called osseointegration. This provides stable support when eating and speaking.

# TYPES OF DENTAL IMPLANTS

# Single Tooth Implant

A single tooth implant replaces the missing tooth roots. It stands alone and does not involve treating the teeth next to it.

# Implant-Supported Bridge

An implant-supported bridge replaces the lost natural teeth and some of the tooth roots when more than one tooth is missing. Unlike traditional bridges, an implant-supported bridge does not need support from the teeth next to it.

# Implant-Supported Denture

If you are missing all of your teeth, an implant-supported denture can replace the missing teeth. This is an affordable and hygienic solution.

# Fixed Full-Arch Restoration

Implants can be used to fully lock in a set of teeth for the most stable aesthetic result possible. The denture stays in place all the time and fully replaces original teeth. This is ideal if you want something that stays in all the time.

# BENEFITS OF DENTAL IMPLANTS

- Won't slip or shift in your mouth
- Offer firm support to natural teeth
- More natural feel
- Help to preserve the bone after teeth are lost or removed
- They may seem like a more expensive option at first, but they can last a lifetime if you take good care of them

Your dentist may recommend implant treatment; consistent oral hygiene is very important for the success of the implant. You must spend time caring for the implant and making sure the area around it is clean to prevent infection, which can weaken the bone.

HorizonDDS.com
---
# BROCHURE EXAMPLES

# HORIZONe

# PROTECT YOUR TEETH WITH DENTAL SEALANTS.

Dental sealants protect the chewing surfaces of teeth.

# Three Convenient Quad City Locations to Serve You!

|Prescott|919 12th Pl #7, Prescott, AZ|(928) 772-9860|
|---|---|---|
|Chino Valley|432 W Butterfield Rd, Chino Valley, AZ|(928) 636-1565|
|Prescott Valley|7890 E Florentine Rd, Prescott Valley, AZ|(928) 770-5721|

HorizonDDS.com

# WHAT IS A SEALANT?

A dental sealant is plastic material that is applied to chewing surface of back teeth.

# HOW ARE SEALANTS APPLIED?

Sealants are easy to apply; and it takes only a few minutes to seal each tooth. First, the teeth to be sealed are cleaned and prepared to help the sealant stick to the tooth. The sealant is then "painted" onto the tooth enamel where it bonds to the tooth and hardens. Sometimes a special curing light is used to harden the sealant. Sealants are generally clear or white and cannot be seen when you smile or talk.

# HOW ELSE CAN SEALANTS PROTECT MY TEETH FROM DECAY?

Sealants protect the chewing surfaces but not the smooth surfaces. Good care of the teeth, along with regular dental check-ups, are important to stop decay from forming between the teeth, that sealants cannot cover. To prevent cavities, brush your teeth twice a day; use floss or an interdental cleaner once a day; visit your dentist regularly and avoid frequent between-meal snacks.

# HOW LONG DO THEY LAST?

Sealants may last several years before they wear out. They hold up well with everyday chewing, but chewing on hard candies can break down sealants. Sometimes the sealants become worn away or may come off, and the tooth loses its protection. At that time they must be replaced. The dentist looks at the sealants during each visit to check for wear.

# WHO SHOULD GET SEALANTS?

Sealants are most often placed in children and teenagers, since tooth decay can start soon after teeth come in. But adults can benefit from sealants too because you never outgrow the risk for developing cavities.

# HOW DO SEALANTS WORK?

To keep decay from starting in the grooves of your back teeth, your dentist may recommend dental sealants. The sealant material flows into the pits and grooves in the teeth. The sealant acts as a barrier protecting enamel by "sealing out" plaque and food.

# ARE SEALANTS SAFE?

According to the American Dental Association, sealants are very safe. Breathing exposes people to about 100 times more BPA than dental sealants. Sealants on permanent molars reduce the risk of cavities by 80%.
---
# Rack Cards

Rack cards are used as brief, informative handouts that provide helpful pre and post-treatment guidelines or general information about your practice. We often pair these cards with a brochure, but often the content on a rack card is not enough to warrant its own brochure. With less information, it is sometimes better to use a singular card. Here are a few examples of rack cards to have in your office.

1. Pain Management Protocols
2. IV Sedation Rules and Tips
3. Post-Op Menu for meals/snacks after Extractions
4. Special Services like Whitening

# APPOINTMENT:

# CAPITAL DENTAL

# IV SEDATION

Before your appointment:

Make Sure You Are Healthy

Contact us immediately if any symptoms of a head or chest cold are present prior to appointment.

8-Hour Fast

No eating/drinking 8 hours prior to appointment except the following: You may drink water, black coffee (no creamer/sweeteners) or unsweetened tea up until 3 hours prior to the appointment. All other liquids/solids must be stopped 8 hours prior.

Restroom

Use the Restroom 30 minutes before appointment.

Dress Comfortably

No tight clothes or long-sleeved tops as access to the arm is needed for blood pressure cuff.

No Fingernail Polish

Remove all forms of fingernail polish so it doesn't interfere with the equipment.

Designate a Driver

You must have someone drive you to the appointment and drive you home. This person MUST remain IN THE OFFICE OR VEHICLE during the procedure. If you are under 19 years of age, this must be your parent or guardian.

Designate a Caretaker

Someone MUST remain with you for AT LEAST 4 hours following the procedure.

For 24 Hours: DO NOT

No driving, operating machinery (including lawn mowers, tractors, etc.) or power tools.

If an appointment needs to be rescheduled for any reason, please notify us 24 hours in advance or we will not be able to reschedule the appointment.

MyCapitalDental.com 271 & Old Choney 402.420.0999

# POST-OP MENU

# DAY ONE & DAY TWO

|FOODS THAT DON'T INVOLVE A LOT OF CHEWING| | | | | | | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |APPLESAUCE|BROTH|COTTAGE CHEESE|PUREED SOUP|PUDDING|YOGURT|ICE CREAM|OATMEAL|PROTEIN SHAKES|SMOOTHIES|

# DAY THREE+

|BEGIN TO GRADUATE TO SOFT FOODS| | | | | | | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |AVOCADOS|BANANAS|EGGS|PANCAKES|PASTA|GROUND MEAT|STEAMED VEGETABLES|MEATLOAF|MAC & CHEESE|SOFT POTATOES|

# AVOID

DURING YOUR FIRST WEEK POST-OP AVOID STRAWS, ANYTHING WITH SMALL SEEDS, POPCORN, AND DO NOT CONSUME ANYTHING TOO CHEWY.
---
# Review Cards

Review cards are a fantastic way to encourage patients to leave a review: The business card-size slips serve as a reminder even after the patient has left the office. They are often thrown into the bag after a hygiene appointment: Include your logo, as well as an incentive for leaving a review; on the card.

We have seen multiple dentists across the country use this technique, playing on perceived reciprocity: Since this is not giving the patient anything of value for a review, it does not break any ethics rules with Google's Review guidelines. If you choose to incentivise reviews by supporting a local charity, then it puts you in a more positive light with patients. These positive feelings can lead to a larger increase in google reviews especially if you're using a text message reminder to ask for a Google Review:

These are a few of the main examples, but you might come across other ways to create custom paperwork in your office. Remember that in all paperwork in the office, design is important; but also paper quality and gloss factor: Heavier weight paper carries a higher perceived value. If your practice charges more for procedures, feel free to use a heavier weight brochure to sell that procedure. Likewise, if your practice focuses on being 'green' and environmentally friendly, then use recycled paper or a mixed paper type to cater to the patients understanding that you are aware of your environmental impact. Since patients cannot easily determine the quality of your dentistry, they use proxies to see how good you are. If your paperwork is high quality, then they will know your dentistry matches that:

# Patient Experience

The patient experience is something that many dentists like to discuss but don't fully understand. In reality; patient experience is not something tangible you can pinpoint: It's actually everything else: the smell of the office, the friendliness of the team, the scripting of the experience. When put together; all these things create an experience similar to the way Disney theme parks try to make 'magical' experiences.

Of course, the look of the office needs to match the experience that you're going for: If you are a fun office, then bright colors and curved walls might be design and decor options to consider: You might even mix in some good tie-dye t-shirts to match the fun atmosphere. If you are going for a super-modern design, perhaps geometric shapes and white walls should constitute your office design. Reflecting on everything we have presented in this book, just remember that your brand extends to the office. If you have a diverging philosophy between your branding and your...
---
Office interior design, then patients will have the sense that things do not match up, thereby creating cognitive dissonance. When that happens, you lose some of the patient experience. Even something as minute as the smell of the office can significantly change the dental experience for a patient. When you enter any fancy hotel or store, they have a 'smell:' This is not random: These destinations actively seek this and some pay hundreds of thousands of dollars a year to maintain this smell. Scent Air is the company most widely used across the country to engineer a smell for your brand, and they sell both the machines and cartridges that you can put around your office to create that smell. Currently it is a $60/month fee and you can choose from hundreds of different smells. For much less, you can also steal another brand's smell and play off their brand's smell awareness. Search Amazon for Scent Air and steal the smells of a Ritz-Carlton or Westin. You can also choose to just go with candles or diffusers, which can be much cheaper as well.

The final piece of the patient experience is scripting: Note that when we mention scripting; we encourage you to outline the general guidelines of what to say, rather than memorizing exact 'scripts'. While scripting has received a negative connotation in many circles, there are a few places where scripting is very important to the patient experience:

1. Phone Calls
2. Transitions in the Office
3. Office Tour
4. Treatment Coordination and Financials
5. Meeting Patients for the First time

To see all the scripts we recommend for the phone calls and office tour; download the documents in the Document Vault.

When answering the phones, we always stress the 3 Es of phone calls. This includes Empathy, Energy and Edification. In empathy; we suggest that whenever a patient has a problem, the person on the phone instantly empathizes with that patient using a statement about how they understand. This could even be that; "Oh my; remember when I broke a tooth a while back and it was extremely painful." This empathetic statement helps build rapport with the patient and shows that you actually know what the patient is going through. For edification, you can then submit something about the office, doctor, or team member that helps the patient know they called the right place. This might look like, "I'm glad you called us today! Dr. XXXX is an expert in situations like this, and they will take amazing care of you." Edifying statements make the patient feel better about the potential solution. Finally, make sure the person answering the phone has a lot of energy in their voice, or at least matches the energy of the caller: In most cases, higher energy is wise so that the patient feels like your office is a...
---
happy, upbeat place. Most often, this cheerful tone can be trained by having the person on the phone physically smile while talking and answering the patients questions.

For transitions throughout the office, we recommend always including 3 key pieces of information. For this example, let's say that an assistant is bringing a patient from the operatory up to the treatment coordinator: The first step would include introducing the new team member to the patient; "Judy this is our Treatment Coordinator; Vanessa:" Secondly, you will build up the authority of the team member by giving out one piece of positive information about that person: For example; "Vanessa is the best at helping figure out all these complex plans, so she's going to be a great help to you:" Anything that is positive and true about this team member is a good way to build up their authority in the patients mind. Thirdly, make sure to introduce the patient and confirm what just occurred. Such as, "Vanessa, this is Judy Muller: We just completed that exam around tooth number fourteen and need to plan for a root canal, buildup, and crown. Dr: Smith wanted 90 minutes sometime in the next two weeks if possible." At this point, as long as everyone knows each others' names, what procedures were completed, and what all is included in the next steps, then the handoff is complete. Scripts like this can seem overly complicated; however, they are key to the patient experience so that patients never feel like they've been left without guidance during their office visit:

When meeting patients for the first time as a clinician; we also have a few general guidelines to direct that initial interaction. The first step is to offer the patient a warm greeting: Do this by smiling, looking them in the eye, and introducing yourself with a handshake. This sequence is just basic societal norms, but amazingly, this gets overlooked in some medical settings: In offices we coach; we suggest that the doctor or hygienist greets the patient in this manner; then sits down casually and talks for a few minutes. This first conversation, or even subsequent conversations in other appointments, should be casual and include at least three personal questions about the patient: We suggest the following questions as starters,

- Did you grow up in the area here?
- How long have you lived here?
- Do you have family in the area?
- What sort of work do you do?
- What do you enjoy doing in your free time?
- For retired:
- - What did you do before you retired?
- What keeps you busy now?

For kids:

Through a few of these questions, you will find something to pick up on that you can make a connection with. In that connection, find the next few natural questions that help you find some other interesting things about the patient: It is in this casual conversation that you can break.
---
down some of the guardedness that comes when meeting a new person. This strategy, while seemingly small and unimportant; can actually be the difference between an average dental experience and a life-long raving fan:

# Patient Giveaways

In many offices we work with, patient giveaways are an everyday strategy to show love to patients and hopefully receive love back in return: These items given out daily are inexpensive, from $4-8 each, and can produce a fantastic positive response. Sometimes offices will even do monthly patient giveaways or larger items for contests (between $250-300 each). Below are some examples of what Capital Dental gives out on a daily and monthly basis.

# Hygiene Bags

Almost every dental office across the country gives away a bag of toothbrush, floss, and toothpaste after a dental hygiene visit. In high-performing offices, they differentiate themselves by either giving away higher-quality toothbrushes, or putting the normal items into different bags. You can achieve the same results at virtually no cost.

See the example these are plastic bags purchased off Amazon.com, and then a sticker placed on the front of the bag: The stickers are purchased in rolls of 500 and the bags typically cost 6 cents each.

# Drinkware

Coffee cups, water bottles, stainless steel tumblers, and other drinkware make the perfect patient gift. Patients love them and these bottles act as walking billboards for your practice. Make sure your practice's logo is clearly featured on the cup.

The company that many DSN members have used, and the option Dr. Killeen personally uses, is the Yongkang Yifu Industrial and Trade Company: Here is the contact information of the Sales Manager:

Email: Jason@zjskirton.com

Web: www.yifuskirton.com or https://skirton.en.alibaba.com
---
To take advantage of bulk discounts you will want to order 500-1000 of these mugs and keep them in a storage unit; as they can take up a lot of space. We recommend that you give them out freely to new patients or to "favorite patients of the day." The drinkware shown above in the picture are about $4 each, with about $1 in shipping; for a total cost of $5.

# Wine Bottles

The picture to the right shows a slightly more progressive patient appreciation gift. Some patients who are not alcohol consumers might be put-off by the idea, but giving out wine is seen as an upscale gift in most social circles. In Dr. Killeen's office, they started giving out bottles of wine and now they are known as the 'wine dentist' around town. The wine is purchased by the case at a local store for $3-6 per bottle. Then it is wrapped in a clear plastic bag, tied up with a bow, and finished off with a branded sticker over top the label. We recommend having both red and white varieties available.

# T-shirts

Custom designed shirts have become a fad in offices around the country: Shirts can cost anywhere between $6 and $9 per shirt depending on style and fabric type. We believe the slightly higher quality material is worth the cost; as the wearer becomes a walking billboard for your practice. Shown to the right and next are some designs popular at Capital Dental.
---
To execute shirts like this, we generally suggest that you find a fabric that is nicer than the average shirt: We generally like the Port & Company PC54 style or the Gildan Comfort Colors blended t-shirt:

Shirts are ordered monthly or bi-monthly, depending on the season or special event: If you are in a place with a large sports presence, then shirts based around that team or sport are great during their season. As the holidays approach, then a shirt based around that season works really well:

# CAPITAL

Shown above is the SmileUSA shirt that was used widely by DSN users during the recent olympic games.

To execute, find a local shirt manufacturer that can print shirts at a reasonable cost in the 100-150 shirt range. They should be able to print and deliver shirts for about $8 total. In the Midwest; you might also consider ArtFX (https://www.artfxscreenprinting.com): Based in Lincoln, Nebraska, ArtFX rolls and stickers the shirts for US with custom stickers that list the t-shirt size on them: This way we easily know what size the shirts are without removing the sticker or unrolling the shirt.

# Monthly Giveaways

The everyday patient giveaway shown previously is great for earning a patient's loyalty, and sometimes even a super positive review after they leave. However; sometimes you want to show a little more love to certain patients who refer friends or complete large cases with you: In this domain, you can choose to give away a larger gift basket every month or bi-monthly: These items cost about $200-300, and we often put them at the end of the patient hallway: We often point to the basket as patients are leaving so they understand that we will be holding a drawing soon to give away the basket. This can be for all patients, or patients who refer their family or friends to us, but remember that it is against Google's policies to reward patients who leave a Google review: If Google were to find out that you were rewarding reviews, they might take action against your website or search visibility, which would severely compromise your business growth.

Below are some examples of baskets that have been given away:

These baskets are typically seasonal, where the weather or atmosphere matches the baskets. You can see above that the left basket is the holiday version, where the right basket is catered towards summer with a beach towel and snacks.
---
# Email or Newsletter Blasts

Some dentists for a long time have used newsletters and old-school mail to continue relationships with existing patients. In the current day and age, email is now the major mode of communication, and there are many good reasons for continuing this pattern. Constant communication with the patient base is always a good idea, but even beyond that; there are many strategic purposes for emails:

If you want to distribute quarterly emails, you may choose to include topics such as: highlighting a current or new team member; doctors' recent vacation or life events, favorite healthy recipes, or favorite things to do in the area that are unique. Keeping this newsletter to 2 pages or less is always a good idea, and this may or may not be important depending on your patient demographic makeup. These newsletters cater more to the 50+ age range.

If you want to target people for more strategic purposes, then you might use email communications in a different manner: This can often be to help remind people to use their insurance benefits before the end of the year or to highlight a procedure that you are now doing inside the practice. With software like Flex (flexdental.co), you can highlight segments of your patient base by procedures completed, procedures treatment planned but not scheduled, or patients who carry a certain insurance. Using these different segments, you can reasonably identify patients who might need treatment but just let it slip out of their minds.

Below is an example email that can be sent in September or October to help patients utilize their insurance benefits before the end of the year: While it might seem odd to send this email in September or October; we know of many dentists who receive such a substantial response to this that they fill up their schedules months in advance.
---
# Office Update and Insurance Benefits: Use 'em or Lose 'em

Hi Michael,

Did you know that the majority of Americans ring in the New Year with dental insurance dollars left on the table? Most dental benefits "reset" or "expire" at the start of a new year: If your insurance uses this plan type, December 31st is the last day you can take advantage of the yearly pool of benefits you've already paid for:

Many patients have insurance that works like this, so make sure to schedule any appointments you might need as soon as possible: December is often the busiest month in dentistry, so we recommend booking now so that we can accommodate you.

# Special Procedure Days

Invisalign is the most popular procedure to focus an entire day around. In the past, we have seen dentists start over $100,000 of treatment in a day if done correctly: Typically, this takes months of planning and preparation, and it will include a substantial amount of internal marketing: From a treatment planning perspective you will want to 'prime' many of the patients to start thinking about Invisalign. This will include creating two fake codes, "Invis1" which means they are interested in Invisalign, and "Invis2" which means they had Invisalign discussed with them but are not interested at this time. After discussing with a thousand patients over 6 months, you will have a decent list of people who are interested but have not chosen to start treatment yet:

With this base list of patients with the Invis1 code, you will then begin marketing to these patients that there is an "Invisalign Day" coming up. On this certain day, you may choose to give $500 off treatment or some other benefit that might induce more case starts. Any incentive that...
---
will help drive more patients to this day will ultimately help your practice. You will want to spread this news widely on social media and flyers before the event, and build up that this day will be a large day in the dental office.

# Appointments for Only Those Invisalign Patients

On the day of the event; you will want to keep all appointments for only those Invisalign patients to start cases. Keep it simple and have each room solely dedicated to this procedure. With the only procedure of the day being case starts, everyone can be focused solely on getting the appropriate pictures and scans impressions. To add to the celebratory atmosphere of the day; have free food or donuts at the end of their appointment and maybe even additional gifts for the patient to start on this day: As stated earlier; these days can be extremely successful and add many case starts to your month. You might even want to plan this day according to the slower months of the year so that the huge increase in production might off-set the slower month's production.

# Whitening Specials

In some parts of the country, whitening specials are a nice way to reward patients of the practice with something of high perceived value that costs the dental practice relatively little. Many times, custom take-home whitening trays or in-office whitening cost between $200-$500 to the patient; while the cost to the practice can actually be quite low: When you give this service away to existing patients for a nominal fee, or for free, this is a gift that is very appealing for the patient. We have seen that giving whitening specials away as a wedding present; or for large life events like graduations or anniversaries, can be a successful strategy to gain more loyalty from patients and often costs you relatively little. We suggest coming up with certain celebratory events to give these away due to the relatively small cost with high return-on-investment:

# Authority Wall

Authority is when patients see you as having commanding knowledge about a certain subject matter: This is one of the 6 Principles of Persuasion as stated by Robert Cialdini in his book Influence: The Power of Persuasion. Usually patients will feel that you have authority over dental subjects when they choose your practice, however it is always constructive to reinforce your qualifications and expertise. To show your authority in the dental domain, we suggest that you have a wall near the entrance of your practice that showcases a few items:

1. Your Degrees, either undergraduate or Dental degree
2. Newspaper articles in a high-quality picture frame
3. Continuing education certificates, if they look high-quality
4. Awards received from any organization, dental or non-dental

We suggest featuring these items towards the front of the office because that is where more patients will see it as they walk past towards their operatory: This wall should be packed with many of these framed items, sometimes to the point of ridiculousness: While it might seem over the top or self-centered to put every CE certificate and newspaper article, remember that patients do not know much about you or your dentistry: They need to use proxy pieces of.
---
Information to know how good you are. You need to give them as many reasons and as much information as possible to know that you are an expert; and this authority wall is one of the best ways.

# Authority Wall Example from Dr. Benjamin Kacos in Shreveport, Louisiana:

# Kastereki Membership Savings Plan

As more dentists try to remove their reliance on traditional dental insurance, in-house savings plans have become more popular: In-house dental savings plans are designed to help patients save money by providing a flat fee for most preventative services, and discounts on future services. By offering this option to patients, practices can help make dental care more accessible. The main group of patients who might like to use a savings plan like this are those who are in the retirement phase of their life and lack traditional dental insurance that comes with a job. Many Medicare plans offer additional dental insurance, but they can sometimes cost upwards of $60/month and only cover preventative. It does not take much math to figure out that this is a poor deal for the patient.

The membership savings plan should outline all of the offered plans, highlighting any benefits, discounts, and costs associated. Consider using a brochure-style format and include the practice logo, practice website address and phone number; names of doctor(s), and practice location(s):

159
---
# DENTAL PLANS FOR A PEACE OF MIND:

Uninsured or questioning just how much you really save with your current dental insurance plan? For less than $1 a day, our dental savings plan gives you access to discounted services, plus free exams, X-rays, and cleanings. Call our team to start saving today!

# Benefits

|CHILD|ADULT|ADULT PERIO|
|---|---|---|
|All Exams|All Exams|All Exams|
|All X-Rays|All X-Rays|All X-Rays|
|2 Dental Cleanings per year|2 Dental Cleanings per year|3-4 Dental Cleanings per year|
|All Emergency Exams|All Emergency Exams|All Emergency Exams|
|Annual Fluoride Varnish|Annual Oral Cancer Screening|Annual Oral Cancer Screening|
| |Free Fluoride Varnish|Free Fluoride Varnish|

# Discounts

|CHILD|ADULT|ADULT PERIO|
|---|---|---|
|20% OFF Teeth Sealants|50% OFF Teeth Whitening|50% OFF Teeth Whitening|
|20% OFF Fillings|25% OFF Dental Implants|40% OFF Scaling & Root Planing|
|20% OFF all other services:|25% OFF Botox|25% OFF Botox|
|Any preventative & restorative services|20% OFF all other services:|20% OFF all other services:|
| |Fillings, crowns, root canals, dentures, bridges, veneers|Fillings, crowns, root canals, dentures, dental implants, bridges, veneers|
| |and preventive, restorative and cosmetic services|and preventive, restorative and cosmetic services|
|$252 per year|$288 per year|$444 per year|
|Works out to be $21/month|Works out to be $24/month|Works out to be $37/month|

# CAPITAL DENTAL

No Dental Insurance? No worries. Amazing dental care made affordable with our dental plans.

Membership Plan: proudly accepted at:

CAPITAL DENTAL

Dr. Addison Killeen

Dr. Brandon Chapek

Dr. Kelsey Sasse

5609 S. 27th St

Lincoln, NE 68512

402.420.0999

MyCapitalDental.com
---
# Membership Savings Plan Training/Scripting

At Capital Dental, the membership plan costs a flat fee for three different subsets of patients, the child, the adult; and the adult with periodontal disease. There is also a sign-up fee when patients start on the plan so that they do not jump on and off the plan for periods of time to try to play a game with the scheduling of benefits.

If you have OpenDental, you can set these plans up as 'Discount Plans' and create fake codes for those plans. You can subsequently also set up the fees to match whatever style of plan you are offering: If they are associated with the discount plan, it will automatically show that discount as if it were a traditional dental insurance.

If you choose to offer an in-house savings plan, it is good to take a few strategic steps in order to make sure that everyone in the practice is on the same page: We have done training on how to execute the plans, and here are some notes to review once you decide to put a membership plan into place.

# Agenda

1. Membership Savings Plan overview
2. What is our purpose?
3. How does this benefit our patients?
4. Purpose Process Payoff
5. Keep it simple
6. Best practices
7. Scripting

# Membership Savings Plan Purpose

We are treating our patients like family by helping provide them an option that ensures they receive the best dental care possible while saving money: We are not sales people; we are plainly providing information for our patients to make an educated decision.

# Win Win

This is a win-win for both our patients and our company: This will benefit most of our patients who do not have dental insurance.

# Integrity

We are honest with the benefits and clearly explain what the patient is going to receive.

# Non-negotiables

This is what we must tell every patient about the dental membership club.
---
# 1

Two cleanings and your annual X-rays for free (Customized to practice)

2. 25%-50% OFF all other services (Customized to practice)

# Price

Concise they are educated on the membership savings plan, but we do not want them to feel as if we are giving them a long sales pitch.

Don't go into the weeds complicated than it is. Stick to the key points provided and don't make the plan more complicated than it is. For most of our patients this will mean a savings for themselves, so stay focused on that and the quality care the plan provides.

# Patient introduction to the Savings Plan

# FRONT DESK (required)

After patient has checked in and filled out paperwork with no insurance savings Thanks, patient. want to share some information with you on our new membership plan: Hand them brochure, flip it around so that it is upside down to you; faces them Feel free to look this brochure over as you wait and let me know if you have any questions. Name of front desk check-out person at check out will have more information on it for you too.

# Patient reinforcement of the Savings Plan

# DOCTOR/HYGIENIST (at appropriate times)

When you check out today; name at the check-out desk is going to give you information regarding our new dental membership savings plan. Its been helping a lot of patients save money on their care.

# CHECK OUT DESK

# Patient purchase opportunity

Hi patient. How was your visit with us today? Great; if you care to share your experience with others, we always appreciate when our patients leave us a review on Google or Facebook.

# 1. SUREDPATIENTS

Did you get any information on our Membership Savings Plan? If you ever lose or go off your current insurance plan, this will help save you some money on your dental care.

# 2. NON-INSURED

Your total for today is $_

We have a second option, which is our membership savings plan.
---
Members receive 2 annual cleanings, all their annual X-rays, and 25%-50% off all other services for the next year: (Customized to practice)

If you join today, your visit will be $_ today: There is a SXX XX annual plan fee which brings your total to $_

So when you join today, you won't pay anything at your next cleaning:

Would you like us to go ahead and sign you up?

# MEMBER

Thank you for being a member: You saved today's visit:

Utilizing this training is extremely important to the overall perception regarding the plan as well as uniform presentation and execution of the plan across all patients. Once started, these plans can lead to a high internal referral rate because retirees love to talk about places they save money and the best 'deals'. If you can present your plan in the best way to show it's a 'win-win' situation, your practice will grow as more patients decide to use you and save money:

# Thank You Cards

Sending handwritten "Thank you" notes to patients after they visit the office is a great internal marketing technique. The cards should be branded with your practice's logo and printed on high quality paper. They should also be somewhat bland because you will want to use them for a few different purposes.

In general there are three reasons to send a patient a card:

1. New Patient first time in the office
2. An existing patient referred a friend to the office
3. You or a team member connected with that patient and you want to send them a card

In the first case, you can create a normal script to hand write in each card and send to new patients. This can be similar to:

Dear [Patient's Name],

Thank you for making us your new dental home. We are so excited to be able to provide you with the best dental care for years to come. It was great getting to chat about (insert information here). See you soon!

Thanks again,

Your Capital Dental Team & Doctor (Your Name)
---
Bring up anything from your conversation with the patient in the note. The personalized touch won't be missed!

If an existing patient refers a friend to your office, then you might want to send out a small gift card or something, if it is allowable per your acknowledged policy, but they will just randomly send out $5 coffee gift cards to patients who refer others in. Here's an example of that card script:

Dear [Patient's Name],

I was delighted to learn that you are referring your friends and family to Capital Dental! Your trust and confidence means a great deal to us. Each time you recommend my practice, it's a compliment and very much appreciated. Rest assured we will take the best care possible of whomever you send through our door. Please enjoy your next drink on me!

(Insert $5 Coffee Gift Card)

Sincerely,

The Capital Dental Team

# Dentistry Is Different Here

# Smile Lincoln.

# CAPITAL

# Trora Ohacung DENTAT

The last reason to send out a card has no major reasoning other than you connected with a patient and just want to send them a card: This could be to a patient who is well-connected in the community, or a patient having a big life event in the near future ~like a wedding or an anniversary. In these cases, we suggest writing a simple card to express your thanks for them being a patient: Cards like this, when unscripted and unexpected, can be a great part of the patient experience.

164
---
# Signage

Signage is a little-used but abundantly important piece of internal marketing: One reason to use custom signs is that patients will be reassured by your attention to detail. After COVID-19 hit, many dental practices had signage made to help people know to call from their car once they arrived. Custom large signs, or signs posted near parking spots, were much-needed at that time.

# WELCOME PATIENTS

# PLEASE STAY IN YOUR VEHICLE AND CHECK IN FROM YOUR CAR

(402) 420-0999

# CAPITAL SOCIAL DISTANCING GUIDE

6 FT ONE DR. CHAPEK PATIENTS MAINTAIN AT LEAST 6' DISTANCE FROM OTHERS.

# HELPING CAPITAL DENTAL

NOCAVITY Club!

If you choose to do internal posters or a fun place for children to post their polaroid pictures, you can do signs like the one shown to the right. These fun and customized posters can be amazing internal branding:

# Another signage option

is to have a folding A-frame sign to place outside the dental clinic. This metal sign has two sides to showcase different services and can be an added piece of visibility for your patients, and other possible new patients. At Capital Dental, there is a sign out front every day, and the plastic poster boards can be changed each day to showcase something different by flipping them one way or the other:
---
# TV Slides

Many operatories have televisions either in front of the patient or over the patient: When this is the case, custom TV slides are a great way to maintain your brand within your office and convey important information to patients while they wait: These slides can also spark conversation with patients and answer any questions they may have:

In the case where your television is connected to the computer; you may place these as the 'desktop background'. You can place all these customized images into a folder and set the background to change every 60 seconds with a new image chosen from that specific folder: You could even post that folder onto the server computer in the office. With this strategy, you can change the set of images in one place and they will update across every computer in the office.

# You produce over 25,000 quarts of saliva in a lifetime:

# THAT'S ENOUGH TO FILL TWO SWIMMING POOLS FULL OF SALIVA

Saliva has many uses. It assists with digesting the food you eat and protects your teeth from bacteria in your mouth:

# CAPUTAL DENTAL

# CURRENTLY WHITENING YOUR TEETH?

# AVOID THESE:

- Red Wine
- Coffee
- Tomato-based Sauces
- Curry Sauces

Stick to healthier foods and drinks and your whitening will last longer!
---
# Additional Items

There are a plethora of ways to market your practice, and you can brand almost anything. At Capital Dental, there are a few extra branded items that go above and beyond anything previously listed in the chapter: Here's a list of additional items you can brand that might spark more ideas for you:

1. Cold Packs after extractions

If your practice does a lot of extractions, you may choose to have customized cold packs made with your logo and website. These are popular to give out after wisdom tooth extractions and extend your brand for a long time as patients will keep these in the freezer for future uses.
2. Lip Balm

During the harsh winter months, as well as dry summer heat; lip balm is a great additional marketing item to give away: We recommend keeping these stocked at the front desk and in clinical rooms. Sometimes patients will need these during dental procedures and so having them readily available in the room will be useful.
3. Notepads

Sometimes doctors like to make notes, recommendations, and drawings on a notepad during patient appointments. Custom notepads with your logo, phone, and website are a good way to unify the brand and have patients take home information with more branding.
4. Pens

Even though many forms of communication are digital, having pens around the office is a needed part of business. Order custom-branded pens and let them disappear into patients' hands frequently as they will get used often and be reminded of your brand: They are relatively cheap and often you will order about 1,000 a year if they are used frequently.
---
# Gift Basket Ideas for Specialists

Gift baskets are a great way to show appreciation for referrals you receive from other practices. These baskets are very popular for orthodontists, pediatric dentists, and oral surgeons. Trying to be unique and clever can sometimes yield positive results if executed sensibly:

As a specialist, it's beneficial to give away one or two of these gift baskets per year to offices who send patients your way:

|1|MALLOW Co.|HAND CRAFTED|ISterno|MALLBATCH|GourmET|VANILLA|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|GHIRARDEL|SQUARES|KRaia|ARE|59 0f ole 9ram|NETWT 10.5 OZ (298 9)|APPRECIATED you|
|than|&more|KNOW!|45335|UNCOLN|{g Or|Quick|
|atoney|s}|42.31|CD|8 822|Quick|8 8]slsl slsl8|
|Wd DPTo|818|BL Tuez|037| | | |

Here are some ideas that might spur some creativity:

- Note saying, "Your referrals are the sweetest!" with candy and sweet treats.
- Send over a box of donuts with a card saying, "Donut know what we’d do without your awesome patients. Thanks!"
- "Your referrals mean s'more than you know to us!" card with ingredients for s'mores.
- Relaxation basket with face masks, tea, or a foot soak and note saying "Take a break: You’ve earned it!"
- Thirst Aid Kit - a custom branded cooler-bag with a bunch of drink mixes, coffees, and other drinks.
- Gift their office with a delivered lunch from a place that you know the doctor enjoys. Include a thank you note for this as well.

SArY CMRYKAL QraLsuaery Relurl

|8B|BrooKLyN|Jneol|BABKA|uhed|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|ZE5|4104|COOhIE|Mim|~BUITER|
|DRC|BA|'SAVURI|168| |
---
Be aware that some states have regulations around gift giving regarding the gift type, quantity, or if gifts can be given at all. Look into your state's guidelines before moving forward with any of these ideas. However; even if you are not able to send gifts, a handwritten thank you note is always an appropriate gesture.

Internal marketing is by far the strongest and best return-on-investment; but remember that this investment is probably not as large financially as you would think. This investment also includes time, training, and creativity to make sure that you keep your patients raving about your customer service and clinical skills.
---
# Notes

170
---
# Chapter

# External Marketing

External marketing is another great way to bring awareness to your practice and find new patients. This form of marketing includes tangible ads, but also any way your practice interacts with the community: While these interactions may not seem like marketing; they actively promote positive brand awareness—a vital component of expanding your patient base.

One aspect of external marketing that's important to consider is how the reader will receive your messaging and what they will continue to remember after exposure to your brand: The goal with many of these external marketing tools is not for people to automatically convert into patients, but rather to increase brand awareness. In turn, brand awareness can lead to unconscious associations, which create implicit memories with the ability to impact brand preferences much later in life. So, how does implicit memory work and how can dentists use these memories to our advantage while marketing?

First, implicit memory refers to a type of long-term memory that does not require conscious retrieval. Just like you know how to ride a bike without thinking, implicit memory allows skills or thought processes to become automatic over time through repetition: Memories begin to decay immediately after formation; however, studies have revealed that repetition is the key to forming lasting memories.

According to Psychologist Dr. Schmelzer:

"Repetition creates long term memory by eliciting or enacting strong chemical interactions at the synapse of your neuron (where neurons connect to other neurons): Repetition creates the strongest learning and most learning—both implicit (like tying your shoes) and explicit (multiplication tables) relies on repetition."

The key is repetition: This means marketing through various different avenues, almost to the point where potential new patients will say, "I see you everywhere." In order to achieve this, local media is a great place to start. Try promoting your practice on a local radio news program or on television news, and make use of billboards, magazine ads, and postcards.
---
Patients' repeated exposure to your brand will significantly increase the likelihood of these potential patients looking further into your practice - and hopefully scheduling an appointment!

After advertising with local media, find ways to get involved with local organizations like charities, sports teams, religious organizations, and college academics. Look at activities that involve your practice's target demographic and create a presence in those sectors. For example, if your practice specializes in pediatrics, think about sponsoring a little league team.

# External Marketing

In no specific order; external marketing can include:

- Billboards
- Radio
- Postcards
- News Release
- Business Cards
- Referral Cards
- T-shirts
- Yard Signs
- Community Engagement Opportunities

# Billboards

Billboards are a great external marketing tool that can be used to introduce potential new patients to your practice. It is a good idea to place your billboard in an area that is heavily trafficked, located near the practice, and easily seen by your target demographic. The billboard should showcase the practice logo, include name(s) and an image of the doctor(s), and the practice website address. A quality billboard will provide a feel for the practice atmosphere and validation for the care the patient can expect to receive.

To provide a feel for your practice atmosphere, consider including an image of your practice on the billboard and, like all marketing tools, stick to the colors and fonts you've chosen to represent your brand. Additionally, to demonstrate your practice's credibility and quality patient care, feature positive patient reviews.

Remember that not all drivers have 20-20 visibility and that they're usually moving at a quick pace past your billboard. Fonts need to be much larger and bolder than normal, and any images need to be very clear. In general, billboards need to be extremely simple and crisp to be effective. Work with your local billboard company to find the right locations, and then work with a graphic designer to build the right message for your billboard.
---
# BILLBOARD EXAMPLE

# CAPITAL

# FDENTAL

Dr: Brandon Chapek

5005-STAR REVIEWS!

& Dr. Addison Killeen

MyCapitalDental.com

SCHEDULE ONLINE

cMOShare
---
Prices for billboards range from $500 per month up (rural areas) to $1500 per month (Seattle WA prices): This includes printing and installation, as well as the month of electricity to light the sign during evening hours. If you purchase billboards with much frequency, the company might be nice and give you free months of billboards. This might occur when no one has purchased the month immediately after yours, and so they will leave up your sign. While this is nice, remember that they often will not light the sign at night if you haven't paid the fee.

Picking the best locations is an art and a science. As you start to ask a billboard company for available boards in the next 6 months, they will give you a map with traffic numbers, information, and costs. On the next two pages is an example that shows boards for Lincoln, Nebraska. In the example, remember that you will only want boards that will conceivably serve potential patients. So, while some boards get a lot of impressions, they might not be ideal for you if they don't serve your potential patient population. You will also want to drive past these boards yourself to see whether they are truly in a good spot. Sometimes what looks good on paper is actually not very visible when sitting at a traffic light or driving high-speed on a highway.
---
# MAP #1

# CAPITAL DENTAL 2021

# University

PLACE: Lincoln

Maods Paak

YagDomSi

RMap data 02021

LINCOLN 402.423,0027 lamat corflincoln

175
---
# PANEL #1361

3250 0 STREET NSFE

33rd Ste

#jfyats

# LOCATION #1

# ADVERTISING STRENGTHS:

Excellent poster location facing busy intersection on one of Lincoln's busiest arterial streets

# WEEKLY IMPRESSIONS:

224,548

# MEDIA TYPE/STYLE:

Poster Retro

# LAT/LONG:

40.813824, -96.67365

# MARKET:

LINCOLN

# GEOPATH Id:

400642

# PANEL Size:

10' 6" x 22' 9"

# VINYL Size:

10' 7" x 22' 10"

# FACING/READ:

East Right

# ILLUMINATED:

YES

# RATE:

$875.00

# SHIPPING ADDRESS:

5201 S 16th Lincoln, NE 68512

LINCOLN 402.423.0027 lamar.com
---
You can see in this example that this billboard receives 224,548 impressions each month, for the cost of $875. This is a very good cost per impression if there is any chance that you could get any of these people to become potential patients. In general, billboards are a great addition to the marketing budget if you are trying to gain visibility:

# Radio Spots

Radio is a medium that allows you to reach out to a large number of potential customers at once. This means it's a great place to market your practice as long as the price is right. Creating radio advertising is like creating any other type of print advertising: You need to represent your practice well and give listeners a reason to tune in. Consider first how to best connect with your target demographic. Speak to their needs and offer solutions. Additionally, be sure to emphasize unique selling points that make your practice stand apart: Below are some example scripts for radio ads.

# We Like to Click

.30

We all love to click things online. You click the toppings you want for your pizza. You click the like button on your friend's selfie. You click to choose the window seat on your flight. At Capital Dental, we like to click too. That's why we now offer online scheduling: You can click and schedule an appointment in the middle of the night during a boring work meeting, or even in the bathtub. So get out your phone and type mycapitaldental.com then click to schedule an appointment now or anytime.

# Dental Membership Program 1

:30

At Capital Dental, we believe everyone should have the opportunity to have great teeth. That's why we've created the Membership Savings Club. An affordable alternative to dental insurance with no waiting periods, no deductibles, no annual maximums and savings on all dental services including cosmetic. With the Capital Dental membership, your annual cleanings, x-rays, and cancer screenings are covered. Visit mycapitaldental.com and click to schedule your appointment today:

# Dental Membership Program 2

:30

No dental insurance? No problem. At Capital Dental, we created a program to help make dental care affordable. Our new Membership Savings Club is an affordable alternative to insurance, with no waiting periods, no deductible, no annual maximum and savings on all dental services. With the Capital Dental membership, your annual cleanings, x-rays, and cancer screenings are covered. Visit mycapitaldental.com and click to schedule your appointment today:
---
As you work through purchasing and executing radio ads, you will have the opportunity to pick the voice that does your advertisement: The radio station should send you multiple available voices in short clips so that you can choose the best one that matches the target demographic you are looking for:

# Six Week Schedule of :15's and :60 endorsements with JP

Each week YOU will receive:Twelve (12) 15-second commercials, Monday Wednesday, 6a-10a on KX96.9 = 6 weeksOne (1) 60-second endorsement commercial, Tuesdays, 6a-10a on KX96.9 = 6 weeks.320x50, 720x90, 300x250 banner ads in rotation at kzkx.com = 6 weeksTotal of (72) :15-second commercials(6) :60-second endorsements with JP(3) banner ads in rotationTotal Investment: $4000

THANK YOU!

Date: Kxo69

Client Acceptance: 2 In Row NEW COUNTRY

Above is an example proposal that helps show how radio stations will propose marketing packages with dentists. As you look at proposals, remember that different target populations will listen at different times, and so you will want the most exposure during the time that matches your needs. You will also want to pick the radio station that best matches your target population. Most of the time the target demographic for purchasing dental services for the family is the female in the 25-55 age range, so keep this in mind as you're buying these advertising packages:

# Postcards

The key to a successful postcard is in the design: The goal is to create an appealing design while prioritizing information in a way that is appealing and helps direct people to your website.

# Using Every Door Direct Mail

Affordable; Targeted Advertising

Use Every Door Direct Mail (EDDM) services to promote your small business in your local community: If you're having a sale, opening a new location; or offering coupons, EDDM can help you send postcards, menus, and flyers to the right customers. Use the EDDM Online Tool to map ZIP Code(s)ᵀᴹ and neighborhoods even filter by age, income, or household size using U.S. Census data:

# EDDM Online Tool

Make the front side look like a billboard that incorporates your logo, validating reviews, and contact information. The back side of the postcard should include an offer; perhaps a new patient special, and feature unique aspects or services of your practice. Much like a billboard, your postcards will function as a way to increase visibility.
---
Brand awareness and provide potential patients with many ways to look further into your practice and services.

As you look to execute a postcard, remember that repetition is key to making postcards successful. Most of the time, your ROI from postcards will be maximized by sending these cards 3 times over the course of a year: The best approach involves a highly targeted strategy where you find only the right age, income, and mailing routes for your business. This approach isn't very expensive, but it takes a little time to find the best areas. Fortunately, the US Postal Service has made this easier with their tools built around EDDM (Every Door Direct Mail). This means that once you choose the route, they will drop your postcard at every door along that route.

# Search for Routes

The picture shows that this route includes 617 residences, at a cost of $135.20. After you have printed your postcards for a certain cost; the actual mailing of the cards only costs another $135.20, which is a pretty good deal.

|Route|Residential|Business|Total|Age: 25-34|Size|Income|Cost|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|68512-Ro10|617|59|676|11.2%|2.71 ppl|$112.28k|$135.20|

As you look to execute your postcard project, make sure your entire costs are within that 30-cent to 45-cent per household cost: If you are only doing 2,000-3,000 cards, your price might approach the 45-cent price point; whereas above 10,000 your price should be towards 30-cents.

# Common Question

Question: How do you track the ROI on things like billboards, postcards and TV/radio ads?

Answer: The goal with many of these external marketing tools is not for people to automatically convert into patients, but rather to increase brand awareness. In turn, brand awareness can lead to unconscious associations, which create implicit memories with the ability to impact brand preferences much later in life. One method of measuring the impact of these external efforts is monitoring your web traffic and conversions during, and immediately after, the campaigns.
---
# POSTCARD EXAMPLES

# CAPITAL

500

# DENTAL

# 5-STAR REVIEWS!

Relax dentistvy is different here

MyCapitalDental.com 27th & Old Cheney 402.420.0999 Dr: Brandon Chapek & Dr: Addison Killeen

# Smile Lincoln.

'5Ladshing

# CAPITAL DENTAL

Dental sedation ensures you are comfortable, calm and relaxed through any dental treatment or dental procedure:

VISIT US AT MYCAPITALDENTAL.COM

CALL OR SCHEDULE ONLINE AT MYCAPITALDENTAL.COM

# CAPITAL DENTAL

5609 S. 27th Street

Lincoln, NE 68512

Monday to Thursday 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.

Friday 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.;

cMoShare
---
# EXAMPLES OF POSTCARDS

# CAPITAL DENTAL

Relax; dentistry is different here

700+ 5-STAR REVIEWS!

Dr Brandon Chapek

MyCapitalDental.com

27th & Old Cheney

402.420.0999

# Smile

Dr. Chapek is an Expert

Relax; dentistry is different here

# Training to offer these services:

Implants
Wisdom Teeth
Full Mouth Rehab
Laughing Gas
Always Appointment!

VISIT US AT MYCAPITALDENTAL.COM

402.420.0999

ChilOrsciouli @NUNe A1 MYCAPITALDENTAL.COM

# CAPITAL DENTAL

5609 S. 27th Street

Lincoln, NE 68512

Monday to Thursday 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.

Friday 8 a.m. to 4 p.m.
---
# News Release

News releases are one way you can share information about important changes and additions that will affect patients in your practice or illustrate how your practice is living out your core values. You can use these news releases to announce new services being offered, the addition of a partner; a change in location, or even to exhibit ways your practice has given back to the community. News releases are also important for SEO, as they can help propel your website's search engine ranking due to how they appeal to a specific audience on Google. Below is an example news release informing the community of Capital Dental's work in Haiti.

# FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

April 12, 2022

# Contact

Capital Dental

Dr. Addison Killeen

402-420-0999

# Local Dentists and Doctors Provide Free Dental Care for Over 1,000 Patients in Haiti

Lincoln Neb. For the tenth year; local doctors traveled in March to a mission in Haiti to provide free dental and medical care to patients. This year; the dental group saw over 1,000 patients, providing fillings, teeth extractions and a variety of other dental care. Over the past 10 years, a total of 9,400 children and adults have received free care at the Society of Our Lady of the Most Holy Trinity Haiti Kobonal Mission near Hinche.

The group made their first trip in 2009, funded and organized by Saint Joseph Catholic Church in Lincoln. Dr. Addison Killeen, owner of Capital Dental in Lincoln, understands the impact their work has in Haiti. "Offering basic dental procedures means so much to the people of Haiti. It's something we take for granted here in the United States, but is a lifechanger for them," Dr. Killeen said.

Starting in 2012, the group began providing medical services along with dental. Teresa Raun, a nurse with the group, said conditions are such that they don't know what to expect when a patient walks in: "We've treated patients with minor wounds to a girl who collapsed in the clinic with a life-threatening condition." The addition of Raun and the other doctors and nurses allows the team to provide care and serve even more people at the mission.
---
A handful of dentists seeing over 1,000 patients in a week is quite hectic but highly rewarding; Dr. Addison Killeen said. The people of Haiti are in need of dental care but have limited access to it. Over the years, the group has focused on providing preventative dental care. "If we can do more than just treat dental issues, but provide care that has a long term effect; we are making a bigger difference.

Over the 10 years, the medical team has grown from 8 to 17 people and has donated over 83.3 million in time and supplies with $274,000 in 2018 alone. The trip is completed on a budget of just $25,000. Their services go beyond care. They encourage healthy lifestyles and eating habits that promote good dental health: "We are establishing relationships with the people and those at the mission every trip we make and each year we see progress," Dr. Killeen said.

During the group's first year of providing care there were a high number of teeth that needed to be extracted due to their condition. With the focus over the past decade on promoting healthy teeth and preventive care, the dentists have seen a significant decrease in the number of teeth needing extracted. "We went from extracting over two teeth per patient in 2009 to around one during the last trip. It is tremendously encouraging to see this progress and to know the work we are doing is making a difference in the lives of the people of Haiti," Dr. Killeen said.

kids

183
---
As you write your own press releases, try to do all the work that a reporter would typically do. This includes quotes, pictures, and telling the story: Reporters are regularly short on time and overworked as it is, so doing more of their work for them will increase the odds that they just take your press release and publication immediately: If you send this to television stations, they might also contact you and want to interview you in-person to get more video for their story: In general, news releases are a fantastic strategy because they are free and reach a wide audience.

# Business Cards

Your practice should create business cards for yourself as you go around the community: However, these cards are also for new patients and as a way for other offices to easily refer patients to your office. Remember, specialists are always asked, "What general dentist should I go see?" If they have your business card handy, they can easily refer to your office.

Key components of your business card include practice logo, practice website address and phone number; names of doctor(s), and practice location(s): Consider adding your tagline to incorporate even more of your brand into the design.

|CAPITAL|~DENTAL|
|---|---|
|Smile Linco|CARYXAL|
|Dentistry is Different Here:|Dentistry is Different Here:|
|Dr: Addison Killeen DDS|(402) 420.09|
|contactus@mycapitaldental.com|mycapitaldental.com|
|Lincoln, NE 68512|Lincoln, NE 68512|
---
# Referral Cards

Referral cards are physical cards or flyers given to patients so they can share your practice with friends and family. These cards should include an incentive for referring new patients and/or a new patient offer. Referral cards are a fantastic way to gain patients; however, they only work if your staff is proactive about handing them out and communicating with patients.

The best strategy with referral cards is to place one into every hygiene bag as a patient is leaving. Remind them that, "We are always looking for more great patients like yourself; so if you refer a friend over, you may both receive a $25 gift card!" This quick verbal cue allows the hygienist to give the patient a compliment while also reinforcing a reason as to why the patient should refer their friends and family. Remember to check your state law to ensure that you are in line with current regulations regarding gifts to patients in return for referrals.

|CAPITAL DENTAL|CAPITAL DENTAL|
|---|---|
|6600 S 27th St.|5609 S 27th St|
|Lincoln, Nebraska 68516|Lincoln, Nebraska 68516|
|(402) 420-0999|(402) 470-0999|

More reasons to SMILE!

Dentistry for All Ages

Cosmetic Dentistry

Crowns & Bridges

Most Insurance Accepted

Dental Savings Plan

Welcoming New Patients

(402) 420-0999

We look forward to seeing you on:

|Refer a friend and you will both receive a $25 Gift CERTIFICATE for your next visit.| | | |
|---|---|---|---|
| | |Patient Name|New Patient|
|Date|Bring this card with you on your first appointment| | |
|Once the appointment is complete, you and the referring friend will each receive a $25 gift certificate.| | | |
| |Day|Time|Capital Dental|
|mas referred by:| | | |

Most of our patients provide us with 48 hours' notice to cancel or reschedule. We appreciate your compliance!
---
# T-Shirts (Community Event Giveaway)

Giving away t-shirts at community events is a great way to spread brand awareness. These t-shirts are only effective if people enjoy wearing them, so be sure to choose a high quality shirt and incorporate subtle advertising: Create a shirt people would wear to visit the Farmer's market or work out at the gym. The design should be eye-catching and the fit should be practical.

# Yard Signs

Place these signs nearby your office in areas that receive heavy foot traffic to maximize these yard signs' marketing capability: Consider locations such as a nearby trail or alongside a busy street:

Smile Lincoln.

Capital Dental is Welcoming New Patients!

(402) 420-0999 MyCapitalDental.com

# Community Engagement Opportunities

One of the best and cheapest opportunities to meet potential new patients face-to-face is to participate in community engagement events. These are unique to each area and can be found through your connections in the community: These events could include everything from Halloween Trunk-or-Treats to wedding fairs. In any case, measure the time it takes to get ready.
---
for the event and the expected turnout of the event: If you are well-prepared and have a nice booth/table, people will come and talk to you and it will be a success!

# Here's some ideas that we suggest you look for:

- Sponsor local events (high school sports teams, local events such as marathons, etc)
- Help create a banner
- Ad in a church bulletin or local newspaper/magazine
- Sponsor high school STEM Academics programs
- Sponsor performing arts (show choir; theater; dance/cheer teams)
- Create an annual scholarship
- Guest speak at local Universities/Colleges for oral health
- Educational speaking on oral health at retirement communities/assisted living
- Booth space at local events and/or trade shows and Wedding events
- Have the team join an athletic league with sponsored shirts
- Create a local guide for fun things to do in your town
- Host an event (tailgate parties, etc)

It is advised to consider how your interactions and partnerships affect the image of your practice. Effective community engagement will reinforce the mission and values of your practice. Start thinking about how your practice can help underserved portions of the community or show appreciation for community members who go the extra mile.

- Host a Free Dental Day to get your name out there
- Give "Thank You" snack baskets to teachers/schools/hospitals/first responders
- Sponsor a meal to send to first responders/teachers/community helpers/nonprofits
- Have the whole team volunteer and wear your company shirts

# Here are some additional ways to engage with the community and have fun with your marketing:

- Promotional giveaways that have your logo on them
- Place flyers with discounts around town (coffeeshops, admin, etc)
- Local places often have bulletin boards for anyone to put flyers/announcements up
- Deliver poinsettias with branded stickers around the holidays to other local businesses
- Deliver potted plants in the summertime with a sticker of your practice on it
- May Day baskets (if your community celebrates May Day)
- April Fools Day silly (but nice) pranks to business neighbors or patients
- Get donuts from a local shop; deliver two boxes to a local business, but fill the top box with vegetables rather than donuts. Place a sign once they open the box that says, "April Fools!"
- Cross Promotions and Local Partnerships (giving new patients gift cards to local businesses)

In general, it is a good idea to remember that external marketing is most likely the lowest of all return-on-investment: In Chapter 1, we suggested that you come up with a budget; and we
---
Normally suggest 4.5% or more on marketing, depending on if you need growth: In general, web presence and digital marketing efforts might take the larger proportion of that spending with internal marketing coming in the second spot: The external marketing efforts should then fall into third place, and are really used mostly to spread brand awareness and create the repetitive factor that we discussed earlier in the chapter:

As you narrow in on an external marketing strategy, external sales people might try to get you to spend more than your budget: They will tout the benefits of 'eyes' and 'visibility;' but you will need to cut through the alluring claims to gauge whether it is the best use of your money: In addition to these recommendations, we advise against signing long-term contracts that stretch out and deplete your budget.

This chapter has covered the most widely used external marketing techniques, but of course there may be others that are great options as well. The basics of external marketing are that the efforts are spent trying to make connections with new patients outside the walls of the practice. These new connections can be challenging to form but will provide positive results over time. These techniques are similar to what has been used over the course of the past 50 years, and they've been proven to work well in many businesses. If you are experimenting with these techniques and not seeing significant gains, then test something new: Each market has different demographics, and as such, it's reasonable to expect that people will respond differently to advertising in each area.
---
# Chapter 9

# Funnels

# What are funnels?

The traditional marketing/sales funnel is a series of communications to a prospective customer that guide them through the sales process. Funnels help businesses track each step of the sales process and help optimize the opportunity for a conversion. A typical funnel consists of a lead generation, such as an ad, that directs the person to a landing page where they will be tracked or enter their information to be followed up with by the business.

The famous Gary Vaynerchuck described this funnel process in his book, 'Jab, Jab, Jab, Right Hook: First;, high quality content tailored to each platform and client demographic must exist to entice prospective clients to click on an ad. Upon clicking on the ad, the prospective patient will then be directed to additional information on the next landing page. This becomes a highly choreographed series of 'jabs' that provide content and information and eventually lead to a final sale at the end of the funnel:

In dentistry; the idea of using funnels is one of the newer topics when looking for high-dollar cases like Invisalign, cosmetic reconstruction, implants and All-on-X type fixed dentures. Since these procedures all cost between $5,000 and $50,000, turning a prospective client into a paying patient is a very valuable transition. Mastering this conversion process can be a very lucrative idea as long as you can clinically complete what you're selling:

# Conversion of Funnels

Do funnels work for dental practices? The short answer is yes, but a majority of practices do not need them and do not have the infrastructure in place to administer them.

We believe strategic branding and spurring demand to be the simplest and quickest methods for acquiring new patients. This marketing strategy is designed to appeal to the highest amount of prospective patients and require the least amount of staffing time.
---
Atypical person will spend five to seven minutes searching online, reading reviews, navigating the website and finally calling or starting the online scheduling process. A majority of people searching for a dentist take this path. When compared to a marketing/sales funnel that may take hours to weeks to convert; you can see the resources for a funnel are far more. To successfully execute a funnel, you need to do what author Gary Vaynerchuck calls, Jab, Jab, Jab, Right Hook. This philosophy requires you to give out value 3-4 times before asking for them to make a commitment to purchase a product of yours. In high-cost dental procedures, this will take even more authority-building; value propositions, and other hurdles before you get a qualified lead.

# When to Use a Funnel

Funnels can work well for certain types of dental practices. Cosmetic and implant practices, if equipped operationally, are in a unique position to use a funnel to their advantage. For a funnel to be successful, a practice should be prepared to focus their marketing and operational efforts on one or two items - such as implants or cosmetic procedures. They should also be prepared to dedicate a larger marketing spend on that one item and have a staffing plan where employees can stay on top of leads, ensuring follow up and promoting movement onto the next stage of the funnel: In marketing plans like this, be prepared for the conversion time to take weeks, months or even years.

One example is All-on-X marketing for implant retained dentures: Most often these procedures cost around $25,000 per arch: This is a significant spend of any adult; and most often a weighty decision that takes years to commit to. When designing the top of the funnel, it is important to gain wide attention and branding around this procedure. You will want to be known as the expert in the area and have a majority of your marketing based around this idea. This will most likely lead to an abdication of other marketing efforts, with the high majority of your marketing focused around these implants and dentures.

As you start to gather consults around these implant dentures, you will find that many patients do not realize the financial cost. To avoid consults that waste your time like this, make sure that you let them know the approximate costs prior to scheduling a consultation. This could include a second landing page, after they put in their email, built around a 'cost estimator' or some similar calculator. Once they put in their email, you could even have the second step that includes sending them an email which outlines approximate costs.

In general, with high cost procedures like this, many consultations will lead to no further action: The patient has no idea what they are looking for; or they might be afraid to continue with such a large treatment: In many cases, this is normal and the approximate success rate for these cases is low after the first consultation. To overcome this, keep these people in the 'retargeting' area where they will still see your advertising and some of your drip marketing efforts for years following their initial decision not to follow through with treatment: This is quite possibly the most.
---
# Example Funnel

Next is an example funnel that serves as the framework for the series of communications involved in the sales process for a given procedure: This example is extremely simple and only includes a few steps, but the most adept marketers will often favor funnels that include much more complexity:

| |Print| |YouTube|Fb Ads| | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|TV Ads| |Radio|Facebook|Instagram|Google|Ig Ads|
|Traditional Media| | |Social Media| | | |
|Online Advertising| | | | | | |
|Landing Page for Procedure| | | | | | |
|Retarget across all platforms| | | | | | |
|Opt In Email Address| | |Yes|Answer Questions|Need Finance questions answered| |
|No| | |Yes|Office Help or Automatic referral for Credit Help| | |
|Nurture Campaign|Not the right time|Calendar to Schedule|Financing Options|Office Phone Call|Chatbot from Office| |
|They back out| | | | | | |
|Deposit and Schedule for Procedure|Complete Procedure| | | | | |
---
Few things that expert practices and marketers will do within funnels is:

1. Knowing exactly where leads are coming from. Tracking the sources of these leads is extremely important: You will want to make sure you know which channel the leads arrived from and how to best present relevant information to them.
2. Retargeting after advertising is seen: This is also extremely important because it might take 5-7 times of seeing a particular advertisement before an individual decides to click and seek more information. This means you will need to retarget possible clients across various platforms and provide repeated exposure to your advertisement before they eventually jump into your funnel.
3. Addressing finance questions before scheduling: It is a large waste of time to consult with a patient only to have them turn down treatment due to unknown costs. This can happen if you don't address procedure costs early on. To avoid this unfortunate situation, we suggest including information beyond the landing page to address these questions and ensure individuals are pre-qualified to afford treatment.
4. Knowing where leads fall off and retargeting to answer those questions: A high percentage of these leads will decide not to follow through with treatment for one reason or another. Your job is determining where these people make that decision and adjust your website or other informational tool to more effectively answer these questions in the future. You will also want to 'tag' these leads to know exactly why they left so that you can continue to address their concerns in future nurture campaigns.
5. After unsuccessful consultation, nurture campaign for future success. Unsuccessful consultations are normal, but you will want to follow those leads over time and 'nurture' them to hopefully recapture some of them as patients in the future. These efforts include an email 'drip' campaign as well as retargeting ads on social channels.
6. Office is built around this procedure with high team training and successful communications. This is quite possibly the largest determining factor in success for clinics that try to focus on specific high-end procedures. If your team is built around answering these procedure-specific questions, then you will likely experience success with funnel marketing. If your team is catered to a more general dental office, trying to cultivate these high-value leads will only result in frustration.

# Breaking Down the Numbers

Sometimes it takes an example to show why funnel marketing is so unique and difficult: Below we have given an example based upon what we have seen in a few clinics that have begun using funnels in their marketing for high-end procedures. The numbers used in the following example are based upon actual marketing and operational numbers that have been rounded for simplicity:

We consider dental marketing a numbers game. For example, in East Lansing, Michigan there may be 20,000 related dental searches in any given month: The goal is to reach the highest online market share. If a practice achieves a 10% online market share, they may receive 1,000 local organic website visits. If the practice converts 5% to 10% of those visits, then they would...
---
get 50 to 100 new patients a month. Out of those 100 new patients, they may receive six implant cases, five clear aligner starts, and five wisdom teeth cases. If it takes between five and seven minutes for each of those conversions, it would take 500 minutes to get 100 new patients. These 100 new patients resulted in $50,000 of production.

Using the same numbers as above out of 20,000 dental searches, there may be 200 searches involving people searching for major implant work: If a practice captures 10% market share again, they would get 20 of those searches. Those 20 people go through the marketing funnel. On average it takes 120 minutes per patient per conversion: Of those 20 people, 20% become a patient resulting in four high dollar patients. It takes 480 minutes to get these four new patients.

Each of those cases is worth $12,000 on average, resulting in $48,000 in production. In summation, trying to use a funnel, if not fully optimized, is actually not as successful for most dentists. Without optimization, we typically recommend sticking to general marketing: However; if your practice runs better on any part of the marketing funnel, or if you are dedicated to changing your practice to focus on this type of procedure, then over time this will become a better equation.

The bottom line is, marketing funnels come down to your practice's operations intimately tied to a complex marketing campaign. Approximately 95% of practices will operate under a general patient marketing strategy, and while general marketing strategies work well, funnels work extremely well for a focused type of patient: If your practice focuses on one thing, such as implants, and you are ok with allowing the rest of the marketing to point towards this one procedure, then funnels might be right for you: The biggest thing to remember in marketing funnels is that you will need expert marketing help to achieve this, in concert with a practice that, operationally, is built around success at each stage of the funnel.

# Question:

Common Question: I just got more training on implants and want to really jumpstart the marketing around that procedure specifically: I've seen that funnels are a great way to do that:

# Answer:

We do not recommend funnels in this scenario. Most practices that excel at implants are generating implant procedures from patients who are already in the practice - not external funnel marketing: The best process to convert more implants is to ensure you have good educational materials; a confident clinical team (doctor, hygiene, and assistants), and payment options that make it easy for the front desk to discuss financials with patients.

Notes

193
---
194
---
# Chapter 10

# Return on Investment & Analytics

It is fun to talk about marketing strategy and check out various creative ideas that practices across the country have executed. In the end, all these creative marketing pieces only produce one outcome: return on your investment. If there is no ROI, then you are wasting your money and your marketing is for self-congratulations. So, as we approach the end of the book, we will circle back into the financial side of evaluating the best return on your investment and determining where to ultimately focus your energy:

# Patient Value

Earlier in the book, we discussed the importance of being systemized in our approach to marketing: This elite level of systemization will lead you to want to know exactly the financial costs of the marketing efforts, and the return on your investment for each of those efforts. The opposite side of that input for the equation (marketing dollars spent), is the value that you are receiving in patients from those efforts. In that sense, 'Patient Value' is the term we use to see how much revenue each patient is worth to the practice. In general, the equation below is the most simple for the patient value over the course of a year:

Patient value = total patients seen / total revenues of the practice

Across the country, we see ranges from $350/year up to $1,000/year depending on the type of practice and style of dentistry completed on these patients.

If you wanted to segment this metric further; you could look at only the new patients of the practice. New patient income is a good measure because many of these marketing strategies.
---
are aimed at trying to patients. In this case, we would include only new patients during that calendar year and the income from those patients over the same time period.

New patient income = total number of new patients income from treatment of new patients

Remember that these values are reported over a period of time, usually including the first 6 or 12 months of the patient in your practice. Depending on the practice, we see that Emergency patients typically generate $800 - $1200 in revenue in their first 6 months of treatment; and general patients generate $500 - $900 during that same time frame. Emergency patients typically have a higher initial spend because they are more driven to fix the problem they came in with:

Now that we understand how much revenue a new patient brings to the dental practice in the first year; it begs the question, "What's their lifetime value?" This is a tough value to determine due to the widely different nature of dental practices everywhere. Some practices are located in areas of high turnover; meaning a high churn rate of patients into, and out of, your practice. In these areas, the 'lifetime value' of the patient might only be a few thousand due to the constant turnover: In areas with lower turnover; the lifetime value of a patient might be in the $20,000 - $45,000 range. This could be dependent on your geographical location or the quality and patient experience of your practice.

In any case, the math behind lifetime patient value is very difficult to pinpoint exactly with any mathematical formula. If you want to come up with a somewhat accurate representation of Lifetime value, you will need to factor in attrition. Here's the exact formula:

Lifetime Patient Value = (Patients seen in last 12 months / Last 12 months attrited patients) (Last 12 Months revenues / Patients seen in last 12 months)

The top part of the equation is how many years an average patient will stay in your practice, and the bottom part is value per year. This accounts for the two major variables and can give you a rough number to attach to the lifetime value of each patient:

An interesting side discussion is that most corporate practices are built around the idea of constant churn because they know that the initial work done on a patient is of higher value than subsequent maintenance and preventative work: They see the first production on the patient as the most profitable, whereas cleanings and routine exams are time consuming and less profitable. For these chains, they will focus all their efforts on new patients and they do not care about patient attrition: Now you know why Aspen Dental probably does not list 'Reappointment Rate' as a key indicator for their teams!

Many family and general dentistry offices do not carry the same philosophy: Most dentists want to be the 'dental home' for a patient and want to earn their business year after year: For dentists in this category; the biggest determining factor for their 'lifetime patient value' is the amount of attrition they have in their patient base. Attrition, at least in our philosophy, is the number of

196
---
patients who have not been seen in the office in 18 months. While some patients might come back after 18 months; it is a low probability:

# 1. Patient Value

We address patient value early in this chapter because this is the main driver of knowing what your marketing is earning you. This near-term patient value is your 'return;' as we talk about return-on-investment: We think the first year revenues are a high confidence number to be achieved, so we do think that using that as your 'return' metric is best. Lifetime value of the patient can be more nebulous, so we do not recommend using that as the statistic to use for your return:

# 2. Return on Investment

To become successful in your dental practice, you need to know how much money you can spend, and what the approximate return on your investment will be. Good ROI means more efficient spending; more new patients, and hopefully more success for you at the end of the day:

Once you analyze your ROI for each area of marketing, this also gives you a roadmap to multiply your marketing efforts up to the most effective level.

# Measuring Return

Now that we know what the 'return' is, we need to address how we will measure and where to find the best investments. To do this accurately, we need to have both tracking devices and a way to present that information so that we can make decisions based upon that data.

In any data set; the length of time you measure the data will give you wildly different presentations. The longer you collect data, the more accurate the analysis will be at representing the true nature of the data. For example, looking at your website traffic numbers for one day will not be representative of much, analyzing website traffic over a month can be highly informative. Though you could look at metrics daily or weekly; this will not be a good use of time.

With most marketing metrics, we suggest focusing on metrics over the course of a month or a 6-month rolling time frame.

# Scorecard

On the next page is a scorecard that CMOShare provides clients to recap marketing efforts from the previous month: In the case of many dental offices, they will spend a stable amount each month on Facebook and Google advertising: If your marketing budget includes other marketing efforts, you can track these in a spreadsheet to know whether you spent money on billboards, radio, internal marketing, etc. This entire spend, divided by the number of completed new appointments, leads to the Return on Investment metric. Your dental software can also begin compiling initial production from appointments during the month to provide you with an even more accurate picture of your ROI:

The bottom part of the scorecard serves as an indicator for how well you are doing in terms of conversion percentage. Just like a stoplight, the colors are stratified into green, yellow and red. Green means that you’re experiencing success in your efforts, while red means that this particular marketing strategy needs attention:
---
# Marketing Scorecard Explained

# CMOShare | Marketing Analytics & Design

This document will explain each number and graph in your Marketing Scorecard. The following is an example Marketing Scorecard:

|Marketing Report|Marketing Report|Marketing Report|Marketing Report|
|---|
|Type|Traffic|Conventions|ROI|
|Organic|1463|85|441265|
|Direct|210| |80299|
|Cost A4|434|717|136771|
|F3|552| |581532|
|Retail| |07|34398|
|TOTAL|2385|131.5|564422.16|

# Versus Previous Month

|Type|Reduction|
|---|---|
|Organic|65|
|Direct|835|
| |94,068|
| |30,09+|
|Total|92386|

# Color Legend

|Green|Yellow|Red|
|---|---|---|
|Great results for this month|Keep an eye on this|Needs attention|
---
# Data Driven Marketing Decisions

Dental practices often use the "see what sticks" strategy when determining their marketing plan. While there is value in trying and experimenting with different approaches, using data as the foundation of your marketing plan will increase the likelihood of success. Remember that not everything that works in New York will work in North Dakota, and vice versa. Understanding the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will allow you to use a decision tree to make marketing decisions to find what works best for your patient demographics.

# What are the top KPIs?

We evaluated marketing and operational numbers for 50 practices in North America over a period of 18 months. During that time, we began seeing correlations between marketing and operational numbers. Below we've included the top KPIs, a definition of each indicator, and target numbers.

It is important to understand that marketing numbers have little value unless compared to actual practice numbers. Each of the following marketing KPIs has a direct correlation to operational outcomes including production, collections, and profitability:

# Lead Key Performance Indicators

- Quality web traffic
- Conversion rates
- Hygiene capacity
- Phone answer rates

# Quality Web Traffic

Quality web traffic is the absolute key indicator for new patient and production predictions. Higher web traffic equals higher production and collections. This is of utmost importance, so read that last sentence again. There is no bigger metric for marketing success at this time than total quality web traffic.

The word quality is important. Sometimes total web traffic is deceiving: It is important to examine quality web visits over total web traffic. Quality means traffic consisting of local people searching for a dentist they could feasibly visit as a patient. Sometimes websites have pages that are picked up nationally or internationally; spiking web traffic numbers beyond what you could realistically expect to see returns from. Many web companies will try to have at least one blog page picked up nationally in search results because the large increase in traffic gives the appearance that the company is doing good things for you. Bearing this in mind, you will want to carefully analyze your web traffic and block national or international blog traffic from occurring. You will also want to make sure that you are not getting a bump in traffic from international paid traffic sources. We have seen nefarious campaigns where overseas 'bots' click through to a website to increase traffic numbers in an attempt to keep the dentist's business. Once the dentist told the website company that the dentist wanted to quit their service, all of the sudden...
---
The online marketing 'worked.' They had an increase in thousands of website hits but it was fake. When digging through the data, the dentist found out that 90% of these clicks were from India and it was all part of a deceiving scheme used by the website company to make their own statistics look better: We have decided not to name this company out of respect, but know that this is one of the top 5 largest dental website companies in the US:

# See the example of international web traffic on the google search console:

|Search type|Date|New|Last updated|
|---|---|---|---|
|Web|May 1, 2022-May 31, 2022| |5 hours ago|

|COUNTRIES|Clicks|Impressions|
|---|---|---|
|United States|7,485|290,062|
|United Kingdom|1,710|55,380|
|Canada|687|19,339|
|Australia|398|13,212|
|India|369|22,203|
|Philippines|189|17,026|
|South Africa|131|5,786|

Receiving this international traffic does nothing to help your website. No one searching in India will be looking you up to come to your dental office. So, how do we know that we are gaining in quality traffic? Indicators include:

- 75% of total traffic is local (look by state and city)
- Time on the site of 1:15 or more
- Bounce rate of 70% or less

When the targets are met for these indicators, you can predict possible new patient numbers and total demand. It is also important to remember that 5-10% of these web visits will reliably be converted into new patients.

These conversion rates assume that you are not a Medicaid clinic or take a majority of Medicaid patients. Since Medicaid has different economics and a different supply/demand ratio in many.
---
# Conversion Rates

Conversion rates are determined by goals set up on Google Analytics for your website. Google will track if someone clicks the phone number button or if they click online scheduling: You can also see which source the conversion came from such as organic search, Google Ad, direct site visit; social and referral. This is broken out further in Chapter 4.

Ideal Conversion Rates are as follows:

|Organic Search|5% to 12%|
|---|---|
|Google Ad (PPC)|7% to 15%|
|Direct to the site|This varies widely but typically is below organic and Google Ads|
|Social|Less than 2%|
|Referral|This varies as well depending on where the traffic comes from|

Online conversions are marketing numbers that need to be verified by actual new patient numbers and production. Often, even if someone clicks through to 'Schedule Now' on your website, it might not actually lead to a new patient on the schedule. Most online scheduling platforms now do a monthly dashboard where you can see how many people clicked through and scheduled an appointment: You can then match this with the actual new patient numbers that came through your doors to determine what the conversion rate actually is.

# New Patient Capacity

Appointment capacity for new patients directly impacts actual conversion rates. If a practice has little or no capacity, online conversion numbers may show a higher conversion than the actual new patient number: This discrepancy typically shows a higher demand online than actual capacity.

It is important to look closely at this KPI, as you can identify demand based upon these numbers. This allows a practice to determine if more marketing efforts are needed and can help inform if practice expansion would be advisable.

As a general rule of practice management, you will want to make sure that you can schedule hygiene new patient appointments within 7-10 days and emergency doctor appointments within the next few days. This is when your marketing will directly lead to productive new patients that show up. Scheduling new patients 20 or more days into the future leads to more no-shows and indicates a capacity issue. If you have this issue, then you will need to first solve the capacity issues before putting more investment into marketing.

# Question:

Common Question
---
# How to Increase Monthly New Patients

First, you need to assess your capacity and demand. It is important to look at how many new patient appointment blocks you have and how many are being filled. One of the most common issues with increasing the number of new patients is not having spots for them. Determine how many appointment blocks you have available then determine how to increase demand to fill those spots: if you have five additional new patient spots per month you would need, on average, 50 to 100 additional web visits.

# Phone Answer Rates

One area that is often overlooked is the practice phone answer rate. Even when you have strong quality web traffic, high conversion rates and capacity, actual conversions can underperform due to a low call answer rate. Tracking call answer rates will help determine if your marketing efforts are working: The ideal call answer rate is above 90%.

# Call Answer Rate Example

|Average monthly calls|1,000|
|---|---|
|Call Answer Rate|90%|
|900 calls are answered| |
|100 are missed| |
|Typically 10% to 20% of calls are new patients| |
|10 to 20 possible new patient calls were missed| |

In the case where your phone answer rate is low; you could be missing up to 30-60 new patient phone calls each month. Here is the math on that:

|Average monthly calls|1,000|
|---|---|
|Call Answer Rate|70%|
|700 calls are answered| |
|300 are missed| |
|Typically 10% to 20% of calls are new patients| |
|30 to 60 possible new patient calls were missed| |

When looking at phone call answer rate, we utilize the online dashboard of our VOIP Provider. In this case, we can log into MangoVoice to see our answer rates.
---
The image to the right shows the main menu of reports you can pull: We always go to the bottom button called "Inbound Answer Rate." This opens up a pie chart of all the calls over a certain period of time and allows you to see how you are doing:

# Inbound Answer Rate

# For PBX: Capital Dental

|Kansud:|1-100|
|---|---|
|Voicemail:|[.34]|
|Answered:|93.280|
|Unanswered:|3.484|

# Disposition

Sometimes you might start to get many after-hours calls, which can lead to a lower 'answer rate;' but then you will have to look at the other report called 'Call Volume Hourly' to see if you're missing after-hours calls. If this is the case, then you will want to set up one additional feature: the instant text-back. If you have Flex or other similar software, you will want to make sure that if you miss a call, it instantly texts the person back with a message.

Here's what a sample message is:

Thanks for calling Capital Dental, sorry we missed you! If you left a message, we will get back to you ASAP. Otherwise, text back here with any concerns and we will help quickly! Thanks!

# Text-back Feature Setting

Below is the setting in Flex that allows for the text-back feature:

|Send a Text Message When a Call is Missed|Send|
|---|---|
|Send a Text Message When a Call is Missed|Thanks for calling Capital Dental, sorry we missed you! If you left a message; we will get back to you ASAP; otherwise text back here with any concerns and we will help quickly! Thanks!|
---
If you have Mango Voice and Flex software, then you will find the above section in Settings > Server and then scroll down: We have found that this setting has captured many new patients that would have otherwise gone elsewhere for their dental care. If you can text back, solve their problem quickly and get them scheduled, you are maximizing your ROI for all your efforts.

# Quick Recap

The top KPIs of marketing tied to operations:

- Quality web traffic
- Conversion rates
- Hygiene capacity
- Phone answer rates

# Referral Sources Tracking

Tracking all of your marketing efforts to see where the best ROI is found can be difficult: Sometimes marketing companies will encourage you to use trackable phone numbers for each campaign, and we have seen that spiral into way more complication than is needed. In one case, a practice in Florida had 42 different trackable phone numbers! This was, of course, way too many phone numbers, and we do not suggest that most practices go to this level of detail when trying to track the impact of a mailer or other marketing tool on patient acquisition.

In general, CMOShare has found that trying to track referral sources from external and internal marketing is a difficult game one that should not consume too much energy: While it is possible to go to extreme lengths to figure out if new patients resulted from a postcard or radio ad, having different phone numbers can confuse patients—especially since they do not often use that phone number anyways. In today's world, most prospective patients will type your practice name into Google Search, and then dial the number from there. For simplicity's sake, having a single number is advised for most practices.

One of the cleanest and best ways to track referral sources is to perform this tracking within your practice management system when a patient comes in for their new patient exam: As they fill out their paperwork, you can ask them where they heard about your practice. You might see many answers including 'Billboard', 'Mailer', or even another patient's name. In OpenDental, on the chart page you can enter this information on the left box under the patient's age, as seen in this picture.

|Patient Info|Age|Billing Type|Referred From|
|---|---|---|---|
|ABCO|39|Standard Account|did a Google Search to find you|

|Referral Type|Name|Referral ID|Email|Date|Status|Proc|Note|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|did a Google Search|to find you|0403nozz|None| | | | |
---
At the end of each month, you will want to see where your patients are coming from. Below is the Reports Referrals Raw report and where to find that report: After clicking that button in OpenDental, you will have the options to pick out which providers they saw; as well as the date range for when they were seen for their first New Patient appointment.

# Lists

- Active Patients
- Appointments
- Birthdays
- Broken Appointments
- Insurance Plans
- New Patients
- Patients Raw
- Patient Notes
- Prescriptions
- Procedure Codes Fee Schedules
- Referrals Raw
- Referral Analysis
- Referral Proc Tracking
- Treatment Finder
- Web Scheduled Appointments
- Discount Plans
- Hidden Payment Splits

# Referral Analysis

|Last Name|First Name|Count|Production|
|---|---|---|---|
| |Capital Dental|87|32,843.71|
| | |71|58,185.01|
| |I did a Google|67|63,544.08|
| |I saw You on Fa|19|32,120.44|
| |I received Mail fr|17|8,681.81|
| |saw You on a|15|13,213.87|
| | |11|16,035.49|
| | |8|6,594.97|
| | |7|3,702.28|

As you can see from the report; it shows the production given to new patients during that time period as well. While this is interesting data, it can also be misleading and confusing: The production of a patient at the beginning of the month might be much higher because the patient then had 30 days to complete more treatment; whereas the patient seen at the end of the month might only get the cleaning and exam on this month's production total.

The other confounding factor with this dollar amount is that it is 'production;' and not collections. It does not take into account the actual collections received from this patient over that month, which can vary widely according to payer source. While we have run these analytics for practices before, it is a very complex Query to run in the dental software and only works with large data over long periods of time. In general, we do not suggest giving much weight to the production data.
---
production numbers in the Referral Analysis' page, but we do suggest looking at the overall total patients referred:

In the case where a patient does not say where they were referred from, remember to always ask when you are meeting them for the first time. Use verbiage such as, "Hi Stacy, we are so glad you have decided to join our practice! This is your first time with us, hope it's been fantastic! By the way, how did you hear about us?"

While this seems totally innocent and conversational, it is very planned and the assistant or hygienist in the room should be entering this information into the system during that time.

# Tracking Data

It is crucial to track both ROI as well as many other data points in your marketing and operations to successfully operate as a high-level dental practice. If you do not watch the data, you will be tempted to follow your 'gut feelings' or make decisions based on case study information rather than the actual data.

If you are going to track all marketing, spending and data yourself, we suggest using a simple spreadsheet that is linked in the document vault:

As seen in the image of the spreadsheet; we track the new patients, budget; and collections of the practice. In each area that we spend money, we also track those new patients coming from that avenue:
---
# New Patient

|Month|Jul 2022|Aug 2022|Sep 2022|Oct 2022|Nov 2022|Dec 2022|Jan 2023|Feb 2023|Mar 2023|Apr 2023|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Historical Average|134| | | | | | | | | |
|Current NP|144| | | | | | | | | |
|Goal for NP Cost|150| | | | | | | | | |
|NP|$37| | | | | | | | | |

# Collections

|12 Month Ave|$238,000|
|---|---|
|Current Revenues|$257,000|

# Marketing Spend

|4.5% Target|$11,565|
|---|---|
|Actual Spend|$55,318|

# Referral Sources

|Other Patients|43|
|---|---|
|Other Doctors|24|
|Google Reviews|34|
|Dental Insurance Website|1|
|Website/Online|7|
|Google|24|
|Facebook|2|
|Billboards| |
|Radio| |
|Postcard|5|
|Other| |

# Budget

| |$55,318|
|---|---|
|Internal Marketing|$1,290|
|Doctor Referrals|$149|
|Google Reviews Software|$129|
|Dental Insurance Website|$0|
|Website/Online|$2,450|
|Google|$300|
|Facebook|$200|
|Billboards|$800|
|Radio|$0|
|Postcard|$0|
|Other|$0|

# Tracking

Tracking with separate phone numbers, the spreadsheet tracks other strategies you can execute to ensure that you are getting the most out of your marketing:

# Here are a few of the specific items to keep an eye on inside the spreadsheet:

- Track Online Appointments Made
- Watch this trend month to month to see if you are adequately using the technology side and keeping appointments available for the online booking software
- You should check every week or two to ensure that the system is still working correctly
- Overall and Quality Web traffic
---
# Tracking Patients and Marketing Effectiveness

Be aware of how to accurately track patients from postcards and other marketing tools (look for an increase in visits to your website a few days after the postcard is sent out).

Watch and time your efforts to see if certain actions lead to bumps in web traffic.

Use Google Analytics to watch trends if you want in-depth data.

- Sessions = identifies if users have visited your site multiple times.
- Bounce Rate = users visiting your site and not taking further action (aim for a rate under 70%).
- More online advertising can increase bounce rate due to increased traffic.
- Session duration is specific to your site; however, longer visit time is typically better.
- Make note of which sections of your site are visited the most and the duration of each visit.

# Track Overall Production and Total Patients Seen

Track total patients seen, new patients over that month, as well as the data during the month divided by total production.

Plot new patients, total patients, production, and website traffic to effectively monitor the entire big picture.

# Marketing Strategies

Keep track of strategies that work well and reuse them in the future.

Make a master spreadsheet with all different marketing strategies/campaigns, or create a monthly calendar outlining specific marketing campaigns to target patients, community, or your team.

# Referral Reports

Check referral reports frequently and meet with your team to discuss if your practice is meeting the goals. Are monthly new patient goals being met? What can be done differently, or what marketing actions need to be implemented moving forward if our goals are not being met? Where are referrals coming from - existing patients, team members, social media, other? Who needs to be sent a thank you note/gift for referrals?

Tracking your major marketing statistics is the hallmark of good operations. If you are spending any money, you need to ensure you are getting good ROI for that spend, and tracking the outcome is the only way to see what is working. Using the spreadsheet and resources in this chapter, you will be able to find that data and execute marketing on a better level to ensure the best ROI.
---
# Chapter 11

# Kickstart your Marketing Department

The dental world is full of unqualified, self proclaimed 'marketing experts' with claims to get your practice to the first listing on Google. Most of the time this is smoke and mirrors. They really cannot get you to the first page of Google, and they certainly cannot get you "25 implant leads this week." Save your time and money by thoroughly screening potential marketing consultants and even ask yourself whether you outsource it or insource these duties.

# Insource Marketing

Most of us dentists will need to outsource some of our marketing management; but there are a few times when it makes sense to bring someone in-house. This is typically driven by revenues, weighing how much a salaried marketing person would take out of revenues versus an outside company: In general, let's assume that a quality marketing person is about $60,000 a year with benefits and pay. If you are spending 4.5% of revenues on marketing; then you will want to spend about 1% on a salary and 3.5% on execution/ad spend. In this case, your organization needs to be collecting around $6 Million a year to bring this person in-house. We know many of you out there are at or above this level, and so at this point; we would recommend you hire this person internally.

While you will have an internal person, remember that this doesn't mean you get to forget any outside help. This merely means the internal person gets to be the quarterback, and then you might need to strategically hire skill-position players. So, while you will have this person on your team, remember that certain pieces—such as web development and other technical programs—will still need to be outsourced.

Ideally, this person would oversee the marketing management but not necessarily produce the graphic designs themselves. In today's world, it is quite easy to go on sites such as Upwork.com and hire a graphic designer for $15 per hour to perform your graphic design needs.
---
Suggest looking for a strategic and organized person to fill this marketing position, rather than looking for a graphic designer: Executing quality marketing for dental offices, as you've seen over and over in this book; is not about 'pretty photos;' it's about return-on-investment. So, when you look for this person, keep those items in mind:

If you are looking for a full-time marketing manager to add to your team, your job description may include duties such as:

- Brand Strategy
- All Graphic Design (Possible but not absolute)
- Manage SEO - pay-per-click campaigns
- Establish and execute social marketing campaigns on platforms - Facebook, Instagram
- Establish and execute Print; Billboards, Postcards targeted to certain patient demographics
- Incoming phone calls - record and audit, track
- Track performance of each front desk person on phone calls - increase closing % with coaching; set up mentoring
- Create and execute internal marketing for TVs, print; increasing internal use of services
- Create, Monitor; and Manage Reactivation campaigns
- Create, Monitor; and Manage Referral campaign
- Create, Monitor; and Manage Reputation - Google and Facebook Reviews

Here's one example of a job description for such a person:

# Marketing Coordinator

Goal: To oversee marketing for the dental practice and monitor patient experience to continue growing brand awareness and increasing new patients.

Pay Range: $50,000 - $60,000

Location: Chicago, IL

Benefits: Medical, Vision, Dental, Tele-health

# Job Description:

- Develop strategic marketing initiatives and activities for the business
- Implement marketing plans that include internal and external marketing
- Create branded advertising campaigns for the practice and specific clinical initiatives
- Set up tracking systems for marketing campaigns and online activities
- Conduct market research to identify marketing opportunities
- Traffic all advertising efforts to appropriate channels
---
# Marketing Coordinator Responsibilities

- Create, maintain and strengthen the organization's overall brand through all media avenues
- Organize and streamline service offerings into user-friendly concepts
- Manage all marketing vendors including website team, postcards, and billboards
- Maintain strict confidentiality of sensitive information
- Simplify complex data into a user-friendly format such as graphs, charts and other visual aids for management and ownership

# Marketing Coordinator Requirements

- Bachelor's degree
- Two years of experience in content management; creative writing, advertising concepts and media negotiations
- Critical thinker with strong problem-solving and research proficiencies
- Ability to comprehend and interpret competitor strategies and consumer behavior
- Knowledge of digital platforms including Facebook and Google Ads
- Ability to gather large amounts of data and convert it into meaningful analysis
- Solid organizational skills and detail oriented
- Ability to work under pressure and meet strict deadlines
- Creative mind with superb written and verbal communication skills
- Ability to simplify complex information into a user-friendly format
- Proficient in Microsoft Office, Google Drive, and Computer Literacy skills

# Team Approach to Marketing

If you keep marketing in-house but aren't quite large enough to hire one expert person to manage the entire marketing program, you could adopt a team approach: Consider assigning several team members to assist with marketing tasks. Of course, you will need to promote a marketing team leader who will be responsible for delegating the various marketing duties and holding the marketing team accountable. This person will be your go-to manager for all marketing aspects and should have a good grasp on the marketing as well as operations of the practice. As you fill out the rest of the team and assign duties, choose team members who have skills and personality well-suited for specific responsibilities, such as social media tasks or creating and delivering gift baskets.

# Outsource Marketing

In the case that you are a smaller practice or don't have a team capable of keeping marketing tasks in-house, then you will need to look at outsourcing some or all of your marketing functions. When it comes to outsourcing tasks, you will need to consider the following: "What makes a good marketing company?" and "What questions do you ask these people?"

# Questions for Potential Dental Marketing Consultants

- What technologies are you using and how are you tracking/analyzing specific data to get results?
---
# Why do you want to work for dentists?

Who will be working with? Will work closely with?

Will there be one or two people that members share their best practices?

Aside from marketing and other soft skills, will your firm provide in-depth financial analysis, tracking, reporting?

Does your firm have a community element where?

Do you give the client their entire website if they leave your platform?

Can I call if there's a problem? How fast can I get an appointment?

Where is my money being spent?

What percentage is management and what is ad-spend?

Connect with another client: Has the person had a successful practice? How many and what metrics were used to deem this a successful practice?

After having these questions answered, you might still feel uneasy about hiring an outside manager and the general notion of handing over control of a significant portion of your budget. Understand that it is totally normal to have trepidation around this decision. As with any large decision, we suggest that you talk to at least a few different companies and figure out one that works best for you: We also recommend talking to other dentists and businesses who have hired marketing companies to see where they discovered pitfalls and successes. Not every marketing company is built around your type of practice, and so it might take a few interviews with marketing companies to figure out if they will work the best with you.

212
---
# Chapter 12

# Stories of Success

# Adding an Associate Dentist

One of the biggest challenges with growing a practice and adding an additional doctor and staff member is ensuring the demand is there to fulfill the growth. While there are many operational factors that lead to successfully growing your practice, one of the most important items on the marketing side of the business is ensuring your marketing is geared toward the needed growth:

This success story details the practice of Dr. Andy Pernell of Summit Family Dentistry of Denver, North Carolina:

Summit was averaging 50 to 60 new patients a month with a four to six-week lead time for a new hygiene patient at the beginning of 2021. As Dr. Pernell identified this problem, he went to his coaches at the Dental Success Institute. Dr. Mark Costes and the Black Belt Coaches agreed that he was at capacity and that adding an associate was the only answer to the issue.

At that point in time, the average monthly collections of the office ranged between $120,000 and $140,000. The monthly web traffic was an average of 600 visits with an online conversion rate of 10 percent:

Based upon that data set and four to six weeks hygiene lead time, we determined there was a higher demand than capacity; yet not enough demand to fill the schedule for two doctors. To successfully add another doctor, the goal is to increase new patients and increase demand. In order to reach the goal of 70 to 90 new patients, we needed to increase web traffic to 700 to 900 monthly visits. If the conversion rate stayed at 10 percent, this would lead to 70 to 90 new patients a month:

Dr. Pernell began planning six months in advance for this increase and then implemented the strategy three months prior to the July 1 start date of the new doctor. Using good operational planning and sufficient marketing, the strategy worked well to increase demand and ensure the new doctor's schedule would be adequately full when they started. Below is the timeline, strategy and cost of executing the plan.
---
# April (3 Months Pre-Associate)

- Competitor evaluation
- Google Ad research and estimated increase in web traffic and conversions
- Design and research for a targeted postcard focusing on a 55+ community near the practice
- SEO focus on 55+ patients

# May (2 Months Pre-Associate)

- Postcard is sent to 4,500 addresses at a cost of $2,250
- Google Ads are built and a budget of $500 is set
- Additional Facebook Ad research
- SEO focus on 55+ patients

# June (1 Month Pre-Associate)

- Google and Facebook Ads begin
- SEO focus on 55+ patients

When Dr. Pernell's new associate started in July; the practice was bulging at the seams. Web traffic had increased from 524 visits in May, to 744 in June, and to 813 in July: New patient numbers followed accordingly increasing from 39 in May to 75 in June. Even though Dr. Pernell was already at maximum capacity as a single doctor clinic, his production even increased from $125,000 in May to $169,000 in July. As the associate started, the clinic hit 103 new patients and reached collections of $223,000 in August:

# Summit Family Dentistry

|Year|Web Visits|Production|New Patients| | | | | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|2020|2020|2020|2021|2021|2021|2021|2021|2021|2021|2021|2021|
|March|April|May|June|July|August|September|October|November|December|January|February|
|2022| | | |214| | | | | | | |
---
Dr. Pernell's data illustrates a few interesting patterns. As you can see, in June 2021, web traffic increased significantly following the external marketing push. Since web traffic increased, production and new patients followed with almost the same growth trajectory: With the insights gleaned from having this associate on-board for many months now; it makes sense how the bump in web traffic positively impacted the start of the associate. After the associate filled their schedule, then internal marketing took over to build upon the growth established by the external marketing.

It is important to remember this significant growth is only applicable because the practice added an associate dentist to help grow the practice, as well as improving the systemization and operations of the practice at the same time. Working with Dr. Pernell to ensure that there was a good marketing plan was only half the story, as he did much of the work behind the scenes to ensure a smooth onboarding of the associate while continuing to run a low-overhead business.

# Measuring the Success of a TV Ad Campaign

External marketing efforts such as TV and radio commercials, billboards and sponsorships can be a valuable part of a marketing strategy. They can help achieve a stronger brand awareness and lead to increased web traffic. One of the challenges with these efforts is measuring ROI. One method of measuring the impact of these external efforts is monitoring your web traffic and conversions during, and immediately after, the campaigns.

During the Summer Olympics in 2021, Dr. Addison Killeen and Capital Dental purchased a local TV sponsorship of 30-second commercials. The sponsorship included over 200 commercials on all the local NBC stations carrying the Olympics. The cost of the sponsorship was $10,500—a considerable sum that we recognize is a large investment for any practice. They worked with a local production company to produce the ad. The cost of the production was $3,500, which included the 4-hour on-site recording and a few weeks of editing to make sure the voice-over matched the content. The company used to create this video was called DigitalSky, and they are based in Lincoln, Nebraska.

Here's the script of what was said in the video:

Capital Dental has changed the way dentistry is done:

Home of Dr. Addison Killeen, Dr. Brandon Chapek, Dr. Kelsey Sasse and their team who are expertly trained in IV sedation, oral surgery, Invisalign and cosmetic dentistry:

With nearly 1,000 5-Star patient reviews, their goal is providing a relaxing atmosphere with the newest technology, ensuring your comfort comes first:

Capital Dental
---
# Relax, Dentistry is different here:

At the end of the campaign, it was easier to see the impact the television ads had on web visits and production:

The sponsorship started on July 23 and ended on August 8.

During that time, the total daily web traffic increased by 26%.

Online conversions increased by 309%.

The average collections for July and August was $268,000 compared to June collections of $222,000, resulting in a 20% increase.

|Average 2 Weeks Before|60 visits|
|---|---|
|Average During Olympics|78 visits|
|Average 2 Weeks After|63 visits|
|26% Increase During Olympics| |

Conversions Increased 309%

What we found here is that; although Capital Dental did not track a specific phone number or unique identifier; we were able to see the ROI using a baseline approach. Anything above a previous baseline must have been attributed to this marketing effort; as long as there were not any other campaigns going on at the time.

The goal with this video advertisement was to increase brand awareness and lead to increased website traffic. As we have discussed in this manual, website traffic is the lead KPI used by most dental practices to gauge new patient and production numbers. What we found was that this campaign did just that; jumping both web traffic, online conversions, new patients, and production.

As we look at the ROI, the investment of around $15,000 in ad spend and development led to a $92,000 jump in collections. For every $1 spent on marketing, Capital Dental saw a $6.13 return in collections.
---
# Community Events and Sponsorship

Participating in community events is an opportunity for dental offices to get in front of prospective patients and introduce themselves, showcase their services, and set the practice apart from the competition. Most communities have numerous events where companies can get involved by sponsoring or participating. This can include events like Halloween Trunk-or-Treats, Neighborhood Parties, or Wedding Fairs. Choosing an event that aligns with your brand can increase your brand awareness and often lead to direct conversions for new patients.

Dr. Ashley Humlicek of Humlicek Family Dental in Wichita, Kansas has participated in multiple community events that have allowed her to increase the awareness surrounding her office and brand. One of the more successful events she attended was a wedding fair in Wichita where she purchased a booth. Her goal was to increase awareness of cosmetic services such as clear aligners and teeth whitening.

To prepare for the wedding fair, Ashley created a strategy that included items for her booth and an online marketing push before and after the event. For the booth, she needed traditional items such as pull banners, table cloth, signage, and items to give away. The primary message was centered around "A Timeline for Your Wedding Smile." She wanted to create a space that included clear messaging, showcased her advanced technology, and included special offers.

To complement the on-site marketing during the event, she created an online strategy that included a landing page on the website, Google and Facebook Ads, and updated content on the service pages showcased at the event. The ads were placed both the week prior to the event and two weeks following. The ads featured services such as clear aligners and teeth whitening with the goal of showing up on searches from people who attended the event.

Website traffic increased 258% the day of the event, and total website traffic was up 26% for the
---
week following the event: This led to an additional 58 appointments scheduled the weekend of and the week after the event.

Of these appointments, a majority of them were focused around Invisalign and whitening:

|Users|Sessions|Bounce Rate|Session Duration|
|---|---|---|---|
|423|507|45.56%|Im 28s|
|140.590|133.4%|+1.896|20.3%|

These additional 58 appointments show that when you choreograph the marketing around an event; you'll likely experience success and look favorably upon the resulting ROI:

The day of the event

100

80

60

40

20

Sat 06 Mar vs Sat 20 Feb

Users 43 258.3%

01 03 05 Uy 13

Mar

Mar 13, 2021

AUDIENCE OVERVIEW

Mar 1, 2021

218
---
# Accelerating Growth of an Acquisition

When acquiring a new practice, one of the most critical elements is accelerating demand to ensure you are increasing your active patient base as fast as possible. From a marketing perspective, the way to increase demand is to take a multifaceted approach. This typically includes a combination of traditional and digital marketing:

Dr. Steve Markowitz of Lakeview Family Dentists in Dracut, Massachusetts purchased a small practice with an active patient base of around 800. This would be Dr. Markowitz's fourth practice, and because of his operational prowess, he was able to implement his operational system quickly. This operational efficiency allowed an aggressive marketing campaign to be more effective in both retaining patients and obtaining new patients.

Knowing that website traffic equals new patients and production, we decided on a plan that would boost the traffic as quickly as possible. With any new practice, brand awareness is key to increasing website traffic. Below is the timeline of the brand awareness and digital campaign.

# At least Two Weeks Prior to Opening

- Establish a new name, logo and brand
- Build website (Ready for Launch at least a day or two before Closing)
- Aggressive Facebook Ad campaign establishing the practice is locally owned and opening soon
- Google Ad campaign focusing on general and emergency patients

# After Opening

- One week after the practice opens mail "Now Open" postcard to 6,000 addresses near the practice
- Shift Facebook Ads to "Now Open" and feature content about the doctors and practice

The results of this strategy are pretty clear: The graph below showcases the website traffic push from May through September (blue line): During these same months, you can see the gain in new patients follows the same trajectory as the website traffic. In October, new patient growth accelerated (green line). After 10 months, the practice averaged 60 new patients a month and 700 website visits.
---
# Lakeview

|Web Visits|Production|New Patients|
|---|---|---|
|2021|2021|2021|
|2021|2021|2021|
|May|July|June|
|August|September|November|
|December|January|February|
|March| | |

The general upward slope of all of these lines generally suggest that all numbers are pointing in the right direction: It can be inferred that marketing is the sole key in this, but it is also important to remember the large role of operations in this growth. Creating appropriate capacity, formulating a great patient experience, and running operations are all necessary for cultivating growth like this.

Before Dr. Markowitz purchased this practice, this office wasn't the most productive in town. You could even say it was an 'ugly duckling:' It was definitely on the smaller side and under-performing. However, it showcases that sometimes buying a lower-performing practice can be profitable and a good decision so long as you pair the correct marketing plan with it. With the large increase in production and new patients, we estimate that Dr. Markowitz will pay off this investment and have a debt-free practice within 3 years - much faster than the typical loan timeline.
---
# Single-Location Kick-off

When a practice is able to accelerate growth within the first six months, the end result can be millions of dollars in additional revenue over the life of the practice. The formula for this success involves thorough management of your operations and kick-starting your marketing efforts. Both of these items require a substantial investment, both in money and time.

This is a case study of two practices, one choosing an aggressive approach and the other a moderate approach. Both approaches led to success after 12 months, but the aggressive approach yielded 142 percent in additional revenue.

# Moderate Approach

First; we will break down the moderate approach: With this strategy, the goal is to increase brand awareness, reach as many potential patients as possible, convert those potential patients, and increase the number of active patients with a marketing budget of 3% of revenue. For this case study, we will name the practice "Moderate Family Dental."

The numbers and results come from an actual practice in a geographic area of 1 million people that started with approximately 1,000 active patients.

# Action items this dentist took in the new 'Moderate' approach:

- Review name, logo and brand to ensure it is optimized for the area
- Update current website with a one-time moderate SEO optimization strategy
- Facebook Ad campaign to gain brand awareness
- Postcard mailed to 2,500 homes within the practice area that are middle to upper income
- Internal marketing that includes branded brochures, referral plan and Google review plan

# Results after 12 months

|Average monthly marketing spend for 12 months|$2,100|
|---|---|
|Total Spend|$25,200|
|ROI after 12 months|$5 for every $1 spent|
|Quality web traffic increased|14% from 240 to 273 per month|
|New patients increased|22% from 20 to 24 per month|
|Production increased|12% from $76,000 to $85,000 per month|

# Aggressive Approach

We will now look at a practice that chose an aggressive marketing approach. With this strategy, the goal is to increase brand awareness, reach as many potential patients as possible, convert those potential patients, and increase the number of active patients with a marketing budget of 15% of revenue for the first three months. The goals were the same, but the marketing budget and strategy were more aggressive.
---
# Moderate Family Dental

This practice was located in a geographic area of 1 million people and started with approximately 1,000 active patients. We will call this practice Aggressive Family Dental.

# Action items this dentist took in the new 'Aggressive' approach:

- Review name, logo and brand
- Build new website with an aggressive monthly SEO approach ($4,000)
- Aggressive Facebook Ad campaign establishing the practice is locally owned and opening soon
- Google Ad campaign focusing on general and emergency patients
- Postcard mailed to 10,000 homes within the practice area that are middle to upper income (this was done for two consecutive months)
- Radio commercial and sponsorship campaign
- Sponsorship of a local 5K run
- Internal marketing that includes new patient giveaways (shirts and drink tumblers), branded brochures, referral plan and Google review plan

# Results after 12 months

|Average monthly marketing spend for the first three months|$10,000|
|---|---|
|Average monthly marketing spend for the next nine months|$4,800|
|Total Spend|$73,200|
|ROI after 12 months|$8 for every $1 spent|
|Quality web traffic increased|45% from 417 to 618 per month|
|New patients increased|111% from 37 to 78 per month|
|Production increased|142% from $71,000 to $172,000 per month|

In the example above, you can see that although an aggressive marketing approach is more costly in the short term, the ROI is extremely good. In the moderate approach, the ROI is $5 for every $1 spent; whereas the aggressive approach returns $8 for every $1 spent. From what we have seen working with hundreds of practices across the US, this is the common pattern. We usually suggest that if you have capacity available for growth, or need a kick-start after an acquisition or start-up, the aggressive approach is the way to go.
---
# Chapter 13

# Dr. Killeen's Weekly Scorecard

# Knowing your Operations on a Weekly Basis

Some practices never look at their operational numbers. Practices like this still see patients, answer phone calls, and perform good clinical work; but often they leave the practice owner on a path to mediocrity: This weekly scorecard is meant to fix that. By closely monitoring the numbers each week, a practice owner can instantly see exactly where the practice can improve.

Filling out this scorecard should be a weekly habit because if used too infrequently, the data means less, and you will be reacting to things that happened potentially 4 to 5 weeks ago. This delay will mean that your actions do not line up with what is happening in your practice, thereby negating any real effect of your management on the problems or issues that arise. By handling things weekly, you can be agile with your decisions and quick to address things that come up in the practice.

When you do this scorecard, it will give you a quick snapshot of the practice and inform you of how you are doing in each area: front office, hygiene, and doctor production. If you set your WIG (Wildly Important Goals), you can track these on the scorecard as well. This weekly focus on the operations of the practice will help you gain a clearer understanding of the relationship between 'best practices' and how they can lead to your best practice.

We are including the weekly scorecard in this book for a few reasons. First of all; we wanted to share this tool due to its recent popularity among members of the Dental Success Network. The scorecard has become a hot topic, and practices that routinely use it have found new things to improve upon each week as they start to develop this new habit.

Secondly, this scorecard will help inform your marketing strategy: As we have stated over and over again in this book, operations and marketing are tightly aligned. These two ideas are tightly woven together in a fabric that creates a 'flywheel;' or a system to regulate the delivery of power.
---
from a motor to a machine. You could be a great clinician; but unless you have a tight handle on operations, you will not be successful. You cannot have a good marketing machine built on poor operations, and poor marketing funneling into a good clinic is equally worthless.

# How it Works

Each week, designate a time to fill out this scorecard: The first week will require 20 minutes or more to navigate the scorecard, but after the first couple weeks, this task can usually be reduced to somewhere around 10 minutes. We suggest that you find the same time each week, whether that's a Friday afternoon or a Monday morning: (For Dr. Killeen it is early Monday morning before patients start:)

Start by pulling up the Google Spreadsheet; and then begin entering in the data. Some of the numbers are drawn from your practice analytics, like Divergent Dental or another software. Many are drawn directly from your practice management software like OpenDental:

In the case where you aren't able to get exactly the same metric as the scorecard, that is ok. If your analytics software gives you the number in a different format (default time horizon, etc.), go with it! The key is to always enter the data that same way going forward.

One final piece of advice is that while you can delegate many things in your life, you should NOT delegate this. This scorecard should only take you 10 minutes a week, but the habit of doing this weekly means you will actually have to dig deep into the data, reprocess the information, and spend at least 10 minutes looking at it. These 10 minutes might be the most important 10 minutes of your week. When executed the same way each time, the scorecard will reveal patterns about your practice, enabling you to make informed organizational decisions quicker than if you only looked at the data for 1 to 2 minutes a week.

Here's a video of how to do it:

Watch the video on the associated website:
---
# Front Office Statistics

|# of Days to Next NPHyg|# of Days to next Rock (1.5 hr)| |NSICX %|Forward Production for next 14 days|Days in AR|AR 0-30|AR 30-60|AR 60-90|AR 90+|Total Claims over 75 Days|$ of Inbound Answer Patients|Attrition Rate (Last 30 days)|# of New Patients last week| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Baseline| |10|4.50%|$100,000|22|80%|10%|5%|5%| |95.00%| |35| |
|2128/2022|26| |16.10%|$99,823|31.37|$175,630|$26,324|$13,108|$25,144|$240,207|$9,232|92.80%|30| |
|3/7/2022|70| |$111,354|28.27|$158,055|$25,113|$14,617|$22,167|$13,707|92.10%| |44| | |
|3/14/2022|89| |$93,763|28.70|$155,146|$38,904|$12,586|$25,082|$231,719|$12,409|91.30%| | | |
|3/21/2022|59| |$85,851|28.01|$161,625|$36,319|$8,937|$24,206|$231,089|$8,115|90.50%| |35| |
|3/28/2022|53|8|18.10%|$99,413|25.48|$158,762|$30,167|$12,334|$13,954|$215,218|$7,751|92.30%|48|45|
|4/4/2022|53| |$138,306|25.73|$148,907|$43,784|$11,136|$16,144|$219,973|$4,985|91.30%| |37| |
|4/11/2022|52| |$122,514|25.45|$156,736|$38,047|$9,509|$16,764|$221,057|$7,005|91.70%| |36| |
|4/18/2022| |0|$95,806|26.75|$164,922|$41,504|$13,271|$16,303|$236,001|$4,113|92.30%| |38| |
|4/25/2022| |0|$105,794|26.80|$177,454|$33,860|$11,676|$15,100|$238,092|$3,431|92.20%| |34| |
|5/2/2022| |5|$120,402|27.74|$184,954|$39,392|$10,314|$15,857|$249,518|$2,943|93.40%|36|30| |

# Number of Days to Next New Patient Hygiene

Where to find: To get this number; most likely you will have to go to your schedule on your practice management software and literally click through to find the next available 'New Patient' block or time. In many practices, this is an hour and a half time slot on the hygienists' schedule. If you use a scheduling software like Flex, you can actually go to your scheduling website and click 'Next Available' to find the date of this next open hygiene appointment.

# What it means:

This gives you a rough estimate of your hygiene capacity: If you are scheduling patients out too far into the future, then marketing might be worthless because patients will not want to wait that long to be seen. If you are constantly at 0 days in this number; it means that you can schedule a new patient today: If that is always the case, then you might have too much open hygiene time and need to cut hygiene hours.

# Target range of number:

Ideally; this number is between 5 and 10 days. This means that if a new patient called today; you would be able to get them into your office with at least one available appointment in the next 5 to 10 days. In the example scorecard, we put the number 7.

# Number of Days to Next Doctor Rock

Where to find: This number is very similar to the hygiene number above. To find this, you will most likely need to manually click ahead in your schedule to find the day when you have the next 90 minute block in the doctor's schedule.

# What it means:

This metric is a rough indicator of your doctor capacity: If you are constantly booked out far into the future, then you might need to look into adding doctor hours or possibly adding an associate. If you are constantly at around zero days for this metric, then you might...
---
need to look at the number of patients you are seeing; your diagnosing rate, or whether patients are accepting the treatment you are proposing:

# Target range of number:

This number should normally be in the same range as hygiene; in the 5 to 10 day range. This means that even emergency patients could be scheduled relatively soon, and your patient base will be kept happy:

# No-show Cancel Percentage:

Where to find: This can typically be found on the Divergent Monthly KPI report page 2. See the example graph and the cancellation percentage in the bottom row: This is one of the few numbers that falls onto the gray line on the spreadsheet; which indicates that it is done in the first week of the month. Whatever software you are using to find this number; just make sure that it is calculated off the number of patients who either no-show or cancel with late notice.

| | | |Broken & Total Appointments|Months| | | | | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |Jun 2021|Jul 2021|Aug 2021|Sep 2021|Oct 2021|Nov 2021|Dec 2021|Jan 2022|Feb 2022|Mar 2022|Apr 2022|May 2022|
|Total Appointments|795|704|835|733|677|658|784|705|748|914|784|844|
|Broken Appointments|120|112|126|103|125|114|146|174|160|144|143|152|
|Broken Percentage|15.1%|15.9%|15.1%|14.1%|18.5%|17.3%|18.6%|24.7%|21.49|15.8%|18.2%|18.0%|

What it means: This means that this percentage of patients have canceled their appointments within the final time frame, or just not shown up for their appointment altogether: This is a function of how OpenDental, or your practice management software, treats these appointments.

# Target range of number:

Before COVID-19 came and completely altered our perspective, we used to say that a 4-6% cancellation rate was acceptable. With COVID and today's society, the percentages are much higher: Ideally you would still target that number to be less than 10%; however; you also do not want sick patients coming into the practice. A better strategy would be efficient use of ASAP lists and a focus on training your front desk to move the schedule around so that when a patient cancels, they do not actually ruin your day with empty time.

# Forward Production in the Next 14 Days:

Where to find: This number is directly taken from OpenDental and the 'Reports' Section. To find this, go to Reports.
---
# Production and Income Report

Report Type: Today $ Date 06/02/2022

Monthly

Date Range: This Month

From 06/01/2022 To 06/20/2022

Show Insurance Writeoffs

Using insurance payment date

Using procedure date

Use initial claim date for Write-off estimates, insurance pay date for Write-off adjustments

(This is discussed in the PPO section of the manual)

# Monthly Production and Income

Capital Dental

06/05/2022 - 06/18/2022

|Date|Day|Production|Sched|Adj|Writeoff|Tot Prod|Pt Income|Unearned Pt Income|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|06/05/2022|Sun|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|Income|
|06/06/2022|Mon|0.00|15,607.04|0.00|0.00|15,607.04|0.00|0.00|
|06/07/2022|Tue|0.00|16,596.63|-116.00|0.00|16,480.63|0.00|0.00|
|06/08/2022|Wed|0.00|21,5| | | |0.00| |
|06/09/2022|Thu|0.00|971.93|972.00|0.00|20,999.93|0.00|0.00|
|06/10/2022|Fri| |27,047.80|-1,056.00|0.00|25,991.80|0.00|0.00|
|06/11/2022|Sat| |14,401.64|-183.00|0.00|14,218.64|0.00|0.00|
|06/12/2022|Sun| |0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|
|06/13/2022| | |0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|
|06/14/2022|Mon|0.00|8,664.42|1,396.00|0.00|7,268.42|0.00|0.00|
|06/15/2022|Tue|0.00|21,339.57|632.00|0.00|20,707.57|0.00|0.00|
|06/16/2022|Wed|0.00|21,133.48|931.00|0.00|20,202.48|0.00|0.00|
|06/17/2022|Thu|0.00|9,725.65|0.00|0.00|9,725.65|0.00|0.00|
|06/18/2022|Sat|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00|
|Total|Total|0.00|162,885.16|-5,546.00|0.00|157,339.16|0.00|0.00|

What it means: This gives you a metric of what the production will look like in the next few weeks in true 'Net' Production. While this is not a very accurate picture of future collections due to schedule changes; it does give you a barometer of whether you are getting busier or slower in the next few weeks.
---
Target range of number: The ideal range for each practice will be very different based on past production and where the practice goals are. Set this accordingly for your practice, but know that this is 'Net;' not Gross Production:

# Days in Accounts Receivable:

Where to find: This is one of the few calculated numbers You will not find this number it is calculated on the cells in Total AR" as well as Column AD, which is trailing 365 days of production.

What it means: In general, the formula yields the average number of days it takes to collect $1 in the practice. The formula is:

Days in AR = Total Accounts Receivable divided by (Gross Production last 365 Days 365)

Target range of number: The ideal range for this number is anywhere between 18 and 30; however; the lower you get; the better: In general, this statistic is unique to each practice due to payer source, digital submission practices, and banking practices.

# Accounts Receivable Breakdown:

Where to find: This is in your OpenDental reports under Aging Rf NR.

Standard Aging of AR: Once you open up this option, we usually recommend including everything and not trying to change many settings. As long as you do it the same way each time, the numbers will be meaningful.

Go to the last page of the report and in the corresponding put numbers for each segment of the accounts receivable.

What it means: This is how much people actually owe you, between both insurance and patient portions.

Target range of number: Ideally, these numbers (split between 0-30, 30-60, 60-90, and 90+) should be around 70% of your 1-month Gross Production up to 100% of one month Gross Production: In general, as you grow your practice, the number will rise. This is ok and expected. However; a rise in AR paired with stagnant or decreasing production can be indicative of poor front office performance.

# Number of Claims over 25 Days:

Where to find: This number can be found in Reports Outstanding Insurance Claims. Many times there are orthodontic claims sitting in this report as well, so whether you choose to include.
---
that is up to you: In our case, we suggest always including those claims to keep it simple and stable.

# Outstanding Insurance Claims

|Fitters|Days Old|Date Range|Date Range Applies To|Date Sent|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Days Old (min) 75|{leave both blank to}|Preauth Options Including Preauths|{ignore Custom Tracking}|{show all}|

The number of dollars in claims is then on the bottom right corner of this box when the Days Old (min) is set to 75.

# What it means:

This is a metric of how good your front office is at following up on problem claims. If you have a lot of money in this segment; in proportion to your overall accounts receivable, then you might need to coach the front office on following up on these claims. If this number is smaller; then you are most likely doing a good job on these claims.

# Target range of number:

This is unique to each practice and can vary widely for practices that do lots of orthodontic coding: In general, keep track of this number and watch for patterns where it varies widely.

# Inbound Call Answer Rate:

# Where to find:

Many dental offices are switching to Voice-Over IP phone systems like Mango Voice. If you use Mango Voice (or a similar product), it is very easy to get this number. For Mango, go to MangoVoice.com, then hit Login. After logging in, go to the menu on the left side and hit the button for 'Reports,' then scroll down to 'Inbound Answer:'

229
---
# mango

# Switchboard

# Reports

# My Devices

# Call Center

# Extensions

# Call Usage

# Call Usage by Minute

# Sound Clips

# Call Volume Daily

# Call Volume Hourly

# Schedules

# Directories

# Settings

# Reports

# Inbound Answer Rate

# Inbound Answer Rate

For PBX: Capital Dental

Hangup: 2.39

Answered: 93.4%

Voicemail: 4.28/0

# Disposition

Answered
Voicemail
Hangup
What it means: For every incoming phone call, this statistic is the number of times that you pick up the phone, let the call go to voicemail, or the person hangs up before either of the first two options occur. The more you answer the phone; the better for your practice.

Target range of number: This number should typically be above 85%, but really good practices have over a 90% answer rate. In any given month; there are thousands of phone calls, and so answering over 90% of them means that you have more opportunities to capture a new patient.

230
---
# Attrition:

Where to find: This is a monthly metric found on the Monthly KPI Report from Divergent Dental, or from any other analytics product: If you use Divergent; go to page 3 of the Divergent report; you will see it at the top: Here's an example:

What it means: This means that a patient has not been seen in your practice for 18 months plus one day: When you lose any patient; it's not great; but losing more patients than you are bringing in is a large problem:

|Month|Attritions|
|---|---|
|Jun 2021|65|
|Jul 2021|59|
|Aug 2021|55|
|Sep 2021|48|
|Oct 2021|19|
|Nov 2021| |

Target range of number: The goal for this number is to be significantly lower than new patients coming in: There is usually no way this number can be kept near zero because patients will move away, kids graduate and go to college, and unfortunately, some patients pass away: No matter what; attrition happens to every practice. The key is keeping it to a minimum:

# Hygiene Statistics

|# of Fluoride in the month|Acceptance Rate (By Week)|Reappointment Rate % (Last Week)|Hygiene Hours (Last Week)|Hygiene Production (Total)(Calculated)| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Baseline|90%|85.0%|90.0%|$9,000| |
|2/28/2022|173|80.0%|95.5%|60|$10,371|
|3/7/2022| |77.4%|86.5%|68|$12,396|
|3/14/2022| |79.3%|82.6%|60|$11,947|
|3/21/2022| |79.4%|76.2%|56|$11,346|
|3/28/2022|142|81.4%|81.4%|60|$12,539|
|4/4/2022| |77.5%|88.6%|60|$9,346|
|4/11/2022| |78.9%|89.6%|60|$9,767|
|4/18/2022| |78.3%|75.5%|60|$10,485|
|4/25/2022| |75.0%|85.0%|96|$14,805|
|5/2/2022|141|80.4%|82.9%|92|$13,843|

Number of Fluoride in the Month: 231
---
# Key Hygiene Procedures, All Ages

Where to find: This monthly metric can be found in the Monthly KPI Report from Divergent; on page 4. The bottom line of the Key Hygiene Procedures includes the total Fluoride completed during that specific month.

What it means: Fluoride is often a key hygiene procedure that is a gauge of whether or not your hygiene department is offering extra services that help the revenue of the department. When your hygiene department is offering fluoride treatments and having many accepted, then it is a good indicator they are being very productive and profitable for your practice.

Target range of number: The range for this number is often unique to each practice; however, we should see an increasing number each month. As you look at the monthly KPI report, you should see that fluoride offerings are at least 80-90% of all prophy procedures.

# Fluoride Treatments

|Month|Prophy|SRP|04910|Seal|FL|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Jun 2021|271|21|16|13|194|
|Jul 2021|220|20|18|12|175|
|Aug 2021|296|15|18|11|244|
|Sep 2021|248|37|14|17|194|
|Oct 2021|214|21|18| |177|
|Nov 2021|214|15|16| |166|
|Dec 2021|255|25|20| |199|
|Jan 2022|251| | | | |

# Case Acceptance Rate by Week

Where to find: This found on your Daily Divergent report. If you review your numbers on a Monday morning, then you should look at the Friday evening report to take this number: This is the Case Acceptance by percentage, shown here:

# Key Metrics Overview

|Date Range|Net Prod|Sched Prod|Tot Prod|Income|ColPct|Fees TP|Case Fees|Case Pats|Re Appt|NP|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|May 27|$12,428|$0|$12,428|$4,531|36.5%|$19,055|61.6%|80.0%|60.0%| |
|May 31|$0|$41,348|$41,348|$0|0.0%|$0|0.0%|0.0%|0.0%| |
|Week of 5/23|$580,548|$81,181|100.8%|$225,167|48.6|85.4%|77.1%|50| | |

What it means: This means that of all the treatment plans shown to patients, at least a certain percentage of patients accepted, and scheduled, at least one procedure off their treatment plan. This is different from Case Fees, or Case Acceptance by dollar amount: Case Fees is the proportion of fees that the patients accepted. For example, if you proposed $100 in treatment and they accepted and scheduled only $25, then your Case Fees is 25%.

Target range of number: The target range for this number is 85%, meaning that at least 85% of patients accepted some part of the treatment that was proposed to them this week. Many larger corporate practices with rotating doctors would be happy with 60%, but we think that is low.
---
you have a good education routine with patients, develop lasting relationships with them, and have a strong internal marketing machine based around education and financing, then your acceptance rate should definitely be above 80%. If you see this dropping; then you need to work on more internal systems to simplify communication and possibly offer more financing options.

# Reappointment Rate:

Where to find: Reappointment rate is also on the Daily Divergent report; in the next column to the right from where you located the Case Acceptance Rate. See the previous image for this percentage.

What it means: This is the percentage of patients you have seen this week that were rescheduled for another appointment into the future.

Target range of number: The goal for this number is over 90% of all patients in a general dentistry practice; however; it can be impacted based on if your practice is a specialty practice. If you are an endodontist, periodontist, or oral surgeon, then most likely your practice is based around referrals, and then you send the patients back to their general doctors after treatment: In these cases, this statistic will be extremely low and most likely meaningless.

# Hygiene Hours Last Week:

Where to find: This will have to be manually calculated off your scheduled hygiene available hours. Look at your schedule to manually calculate this number.

What it means: This is a good way to track the overall growth of the hygiene department over time. As this column sits right next to the Hygiene Production column on the weekly scorecard, you can see the direct correlation between hours available and Total Production.

Target range of number: If your practice is growing, your number of available hygiene hours should also be growing. The other interesting statistic is that if you are scheduling far out into the future, as in the first column on the scorecard, you can see the connection between this number and that timeframe number. As you add more available hygiene hours, see how that number drops to more acceptable levels. For example, you could be scheduling out 3 months for hygiene appointments right now but only offer 70 hours a week of hygiene. As you hire and onboard another hygienist for 20 hours a week; you might see that Number of Days to Next Hygiene' number drop to the acceptable 5-10 days range.

# Hygiene Production Last Week:

Where to find: This will be a calculated number based off the Total Production and Doctor Production in the next two columns.

What it means: This is just the culmination of all the hygiene production.

Target range of number: Watch to see that this number is growing in correlation to the overall hygiene hours and overall production. Remember that the target range for most offices is that.
---
Hygiene is approximately 25% of all production. Higher than 25% indicates that you are not doing enough dentistry, while a lower percentage indicates that your hygiene may be underperforming:

# Doctor Statistics and WIG Goals:

|Doctor|Total Production (Total)|Production Fees (Net)|Weekly STP|TOTAL Collections|Collections $|%|# of Google Reviews|WIG Goals|Previous 365 YTD Revenues|YTD New Patients|TOTAL Production (To help calculate Days in AR)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Baseline|$75,000|$100,000|$65,000|$156,000|$65,000|99.50%|1200 Reviews|$3.3 M|1200 NP| | |
|2/28/2022|$60,508|$70,879|$48,759|$541,768|85.66%| |609|$582,833|405|$2,795,195| |
|3/7/2022|$62,206|$74,602|$42,506|$99,473|$65,380|153.81%| |621|$648,053|453|$52,868,079|
|3/14/2022|$66,586|$78,533|$56,582|$98,290|$43,650|77.14%| |627|$690,907|487|$52,946,542|
|3/21/2022|$54,038|$65,384|$44,866|$138,947|$43,316|96.55%| |634|$734,223|522|$53,011,302|
|3/28/2022|$559,431|$71,970|$36,316|$127,934|$556,701|156.13%| |654|$790,791|567|$53,082,816|
|4/4/2022|$64,654|$74,000|$847,807|$5187,499|$39,263|82.13%| |676|$830,187|604|$53,120,192|
|4/11/2022|$72,543|$82,310|$55,088|$109,328|$57,040|103.54%| |686|$888,207|640|$3,170,010|
|4/18/2022|$88,667|$99,152|$72,748|$5107,309|$52,757|72.52%| |697|$5940,072|678|$3,220,332|
|4/25/2022|$55,162|$69,967|$847,154|$127,416|$42,113|89.31%| |710|$986,034|712|$53,242,439|
|5/2/2022|$65,860|$73,964|$55,814|$75,636|$543,528|77.99%| |722|$1,029,561|742|$3,283,226|

# Doctor Production:

Where to find: When you are in Reports _ More options, you can pick the specific date range that you are looking for: Pick the last 7 days, or previous week, and then get those statistics for only the certain providers you are looking for: In the case where you have multiple doctors in your clinic, you can hold down the "Control" key and highlight multiple doctors at the same time.

What it means: This is simply the Gross Doctor Production for the previous week. This means that if you were not giving any discounts or participating with any insurance, this would be the full production amount possible for the doctors that particular week.

Target range of number: This will be unique to your practice, but watching the trends over time will be the largest value in recording this number:

# Total Production:

Where to find: When you are in Reports _ More options, you can pick the specific date range that you are looking for and make sure to highlight Providers AII (Includes Hidden: This will give you the entire Office Production, including doctors and hygienists. This number is found under the farthest left column labeled Production.

|Date|Day|Production|Sched|Adj|Writeoff|Tot Prod|Pt Income|Unearned Pt Income|Ins Income|Tot Income|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|05/08/2022|Sun|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|Income|$0.00|$0.00|
|05/09/2022|Mon|$16,472.85|$0.00|$853.85|$65,144.85|$12,181.85|$8,424.99|$0.00|$32,897.63| |
|05/10/2022|Tue|$21,817.12|$0.00|-$1,632.00|-$2,054.58|$18,130.54| |$650.00|$2,632.83|$11,957.96|
|05/11/2022|Wed|$22,255.25|$0.00|-$1,401.00|$44,103.30|$16,750.95|$3,219.34|$5,669.20|$3,069.42| |
|05/12/2022|Thu|$23,880.90|$0.00|-$1,232.40|-$2,663.65|$19,984.85|$2,934.27|$878.80|$15,837.16|$19,650.23|
|05/13/2022|Fri|$15,762.73|$0.00|$0.00|-$1,353.90|$14,408.83|$1,147.56|$25,361.50|$2,010.50|$28,519.56|
|05/14/2022|Sat|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|$0.00|
| | |$100,188.85|$0.00|$33,411.55|-$15,320.28|$81,457.02|$22,429.84|$33,407.70|$47,174.35|$103,011.89|
---
What it means: This is the Gross Production of the entire office. This number; combined with subtracting the Doctor-only Production, also leads to the calculated Hygiene Production number:

Target range of number: Watch this number week to week to see trends over time due to seasonality, holidays, vacations, and other factors. Overall, you will want to see this number increase all the time, or at least stay at the level where you are happy:

# Net Production:

Where to find: This is found on the same report as the "Total Production" number above, but under the heading of "Tot Production." This includes only the Net Production, which is factoring in adjustments and write-offs. This will be for the same time frame and includes all providers.

What it means: This number is the production that is actually able to be collected, so it will most likely be significantly less than Gross Production. The odd thing is that this number is calculated from the write-offs that actually are from previous production. Typically, it is still not accurate to the specific week under inspection, but it gives you a decent indication of Net Production:

Target range of number: This will usually be a percentage less than your Total Production; but the key here is to see that it is within your goal range each week:

# Fees Treatment Planned:

Where to find: This is on your Daily Divergent Report from the last report of the week, typically on a Friday evening: Look at the "FeesTP" and under the row including the entire week. In the example, it shows $225,167 for the fees treatment planned for the entire week. Copy the cell above in the spreadsheet and paste it down so it follows the green-red spectrum like the existing cells.

# Key Metrics Overview

|Date Range|Net Prod|Sched Prod|Tot Prod|Income|ColPct|Fees TP|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|May 27|$12,428|SO|$12,428|$4,531|36.5%|$19,055|
|May 31|SO|$541,348|$41,348|SO|0.0%| |
|Week of 5/23|$80,548|SO|$80,548|$81,181|100.8%|$225,167|

What it means: This includes all treatment entered into the system during the past week under treatment planned. In the case where you would plan both a bridge and an implant; it would include both options in the dollar totals. This number; combined with Fees Acceptance rate in the next columns, shows you the future production that you are already scheduled to receive based on the treatment plans for this week:

Target range of number: You always like to see this number high, but it is different for each practice. In the case where your practice does "bread and butter" dentistry, Fees TP might be lower and your acceptance rate higher, leading to a moderate production level. For practices that do more high-end esthetics, implants, or surgery; you might treatment plan a lot more. However; these practices usually have a lower acceptance rate, still leading to a moderate production level.
---
moderate or high production. For your practice, watch the trends to see whether you need to work on treatment planning more procedures, offering more complex procedures, or whether your production problems might be a function of your treatment acceptance rates.

# Collections Total:

Where to find: This is on your practice management report just like Total Production and Net Production.

What it means: This is the collections that came in this week, even though it might be from production in previous weeks if it is from patient payments delayed in the mail or insurance payments from previous treatment:

Target range of number: The ideal range for this number is to closely match the Net Production.

# Collections %

Where to find: This is a calculated cell based on Net Production and Collections:

What it means: This means that of the money you could have collected, this is the percentage that you actually did collect: While it seems simple that you would be at 100% of collections all the time, the time frame of a week actually makes this number much more variable than normal.

Target range of number: Goals for Collections Percentage is 100%, but realistically even the best practices are only in the 99.5% range. Since this is a weekly statistic, just watch this number over time to make sure that; over time, you are able to get this number averaging near 100%.

# WIG Goals:

"Wildly Important Goals" that you have for the practice. This is the section where you can set the 3 to 7 goals for the practice, if using the WIG philosophy, should be statistics where you can actually say that the goals were either met or not met. In the example above, the goals of the practice were Google Reviews, New Patients, and Collections. If the practice meets these goals, it will be easy to see as a simple number:

In your practice, it is best to choose very simple goals and keep the team focused on these goals. The WIG philosophy should align the entire goals of the team, and every team member should have a smaller goal that helps contribute to the larger goal: In general, the weekly scorecard all points to many of the leading and trailing indicators that contribute to the dental practice achieving the WIG Goals.

# Previous 365-day Gross Production:

Where to find: This number is under Productionard Income Perart Reports Standard More Options. Report Type Click on the option for Annual' and Today's Date | 06/04/2022.
---
include all providers Then, go to the date range and set it to the same date for last year and then this year: In the example shown; it chooses May 8th of the previous year and current year. After running this report, it will output the monthly totals and only include a trailing 365 days of production and income. See the next example.

What it means: This gives you the trailing 365 days of Total Production, Net Production, and Collections. This is used to help calculate "Days in AR;" which is in the Front Office Statistics.

|Month|Production|
|---|---|
|May 2021|246,872.88|
|Jun 2021|444,489.89|
|Jul 2021|383,684.75|
|Aug 2021|441,088.87|
|Sep 2021|343,378.50|
|Oct 2021|299,946.59|
|Nov 2021|354,273.05|
|Dec 2021|407,668.28|
|Jan 2022|379,626.47|
|Feb 2022|412,796.46|
|Mar 2022|496,862.94|
|Apr 2022|400,240.04|
|May 2022|L0o P16|

Total Production: 4,719,255.39

237

Wrapping up the Weekly Scorecard: If you start and continue the habit of filling out this weekly scorecard, you will gain insights into your clinic on a deeper level and at a quicker cadence. Since this is a new habit; it might take a few weeks to feel truly comfortable with the numbers and how to pull them. However; we know that over time you will grow to love the insights gleaned from this weekly practice.
---
238