# How to Use a Data-Driven Approach to Grow Your Dental Practice

# GEORGE S. HARIRI, DMD
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Copyright &copy; 2023 by Shared Practices

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law.
---
I dedicate this book to the next generation of dental entrepreneurs.

Learn to guide your ship and take it toward the best version of your life as a dentist: May this book be your inspiration that whatever you really want in life is within reach.
---
# TABLE OF CONTENTS

# FOREWORD

# INTRODUCTION

# A Predictable Process for Practice Growth

13

# What Do You Really Want?

21

# PART I: WHAT'S WRONG WITH THE DENTAL INDUSTRY STANDARD

# CHAPTER 1 INDUSTRY STANDARDS

# What You Don't Know Can Hurt You

25

# Dental Accountants

28

# Additional Industry Standards That Don't Work

29

# What It's Costing You:

31

# Takeaways

33

# CHAPTER 2 ANALYTICS BASED MINDSET

# Why Go for Growth?

37

# Practice-O1K versus 401

40

# Real Case Study Practice-OIK

41

# What Is an Analytics Based Mindset?

45

# The Four Challenging Principles of Analytics

46

# Having Proper Expectations

51

# Better Decision-Making Process

52

# Takeaways

53
---
# CHAPTER 3 ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

54

The Dental 3-Pointer.

57

Predictable System

64

How a Practice Flows

65

The Practice Components Are Connected

70

Trickle-Down Effect

71

Work-Life Harmony

73

Takeaways

75

# PART II: PRACTICE FLOWCHARTS AND STRATEGIES

# CHAPTER 4 PATIENT RETENTION

78

How My Epiphany Changed Everything:

79

The Leaky Bucket.

81

The Importance of Retention

83

Strategic Hygiene Openings

91

Takeaways

93

# CHAPTER 5 TREATMENT RETENTION

94

Moving the Productivity Needle.

96

A Team-Led Approach

99

Scheduling;

107

Hygiene Production

108

Takeaways

109

# CHAPTER 6 REVENUE RETENTION

110

Overhead Percentages as Industry Standard

111

The Journey of a Dental Dollar.

112

Break-Even Point Analysis

117

Takeaways

119

# PART III: TEAM AND EXECUTION

# CHAPTER 7 PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

122

PSS Ownership Models.

123

Where Are You and Where Do You Want to Go?

141

Takeaways

142
---
# CHAPTER 8    TEAM INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXECUTION

- Team-Led Growth
- Building Practice Infrastructure
- Delegation
- Why> What   How
- Singular Focus per Department_
- FeedbackLoop
- Review Metrics
- Celebrate the Wins!
- Takeaways _

# CHAPTER 9    CASE STUDIES

- Solo to Productive Solo Practice
- Productive Solo to Group Practice _
- Real Case Study -Super Solo to Profitable Group Transition
- Group to MegaGroup Practice
- Associate Retention Strategy_
- Compounding Cycles over Time.
- Wrapping Up Transformations
- Takeaways _

# CONCLUSION
---
# FOREWORD

Shared Practices started as a podcast in a closet near Fort Hood, Texas. The hanging clothes in a closet make for a cheap sound booth, but just as importantly, the closet was an ideal hiding place from my kids while interviewing my mentors, like Dr. Scott Leune, Dr. Howard Farran, Dr. Mark Costes, or Dr. Alan Mead. I was also hiding from the scrutiny of the US Army and the fact that I was a new grad podcasting about practice ownership, something I was obsessed with but couldn't do anything about for years to come.

It was 2016 and I was facing 5 more years in the army repaying my Health Professions Service Scholarship and residency. As a serial entrepreneur since the first time I started a Popsicle stand at age 7, I was realizing that my army commitment might be at odds with my strong desire to own a dental practice as soon as possible. But I was grateful for my scholarship, my residency, and the chance to serve the men and women of the US Army as my patient base.

So what could I do with all this pent-up angst? Podcast about it!

At the time, there was no playbook for going from new grad to practice owner: Most young dentists graduating with half a million dollars of debt assume that practice ownership is out of reach for them. Over and over, I heard friends say things like "I've heard I should work for 6 or 7 years and then maybe buy a practice;" or "My family thinks I'm crazy for taking on this much school debt and then wanting to buy a practice. Maybe I should do the...
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

Dave Ramsey thing and pay down my student loans before buying a practice. This advice didn't sit well with me; it was coming from people who weren't entrepreneurs and who didn't understand the possibilities in dentistry for business owners who do things the right way:

When I brought on Dr. George Hariri as my partner and cohost of Shared Practices, that's when everything changed. I inherently trusted George, his vision, and capacity as an entrepreneur from day one. I brought him on as a 50/50 partner almost immediately, despite the warnings of my business coaches at the time who didn't know him.

George is a Visionary with a capital V. You know you've met a true visionary because you can't help leaning in to feel their excitement; their conviction, and you want to be part of whatever it is they're building. They think 3 steps ahead and change industries forever. However, unlike some visionaries who care only about themselves and what they're building, George cares deeply about the well-being of our team; our listeners, and our clients. When his attention is on you, you feel like no one else is in the room and that he's fully invested in your success.

I've also never met someone who so strongly embodied the phrase "Strong opinions, loosely held." Over the years, George, myself, and our other partners have disagreed on many things. What is unique is George's ability to come in with passion and new ideas, but then quickly absorb new data, contrasting opinions, and even difficult feedback and completely change his perspective and move forward without resentment. The CEO role has moved from myself to George and then back to me, and all along I've never lost the conviction I had when I first partnered with George: I'd rather have part of a business with George's vision driving it than 100 percent of a business limited by me and my vision.

George joined during our second season of the podcast, which focused exclusively on acquisitions, on exactly how to find, value, and purchase the...
---
# FOREWORD

Listeners reached out to us and said, *I found and bought my dental practice because of Shared Practices. This has changed my life.* Early practice ownership became the vehicle to build wealth, maintain career satisfaction, and get out from the crushing worry of student loans. Because we weren't afraid to go deep into the numbers, to find and tell real stories of the challenges and possibilities of practice ownership, we quickly became the number-one-rated dental podcast in the industry and have stayed that way ever since.

Fast-forward to July of 2021. I was sitting on the top floor of the Marquette Hotel overlooking all of Minneapolis, listening to George Hariri lecture, who at the time was our CEO, to an audience of over 100 attendees. In that moment, I realized that we had finally created exactly what I felt was missing 5 years prior when I started the podcast: a comprehensive framework to understand dental practice ownership and repeatedly create growth and success. Analytics Based Practice Management was not only our first live course; it was a completely new way of thinking about how to run a dental practice.

My dad, Murray Low, was in the audience, and as an executive business consultant with over 30 years of experience, he turned to me and said, "This makes so much sense." I turned back and said, "What you don't realize is how countercultural this framework is to what everyone else in the dental consulting industry has been saying for years." I was actually mad. Because, to him, hearing it from George alongside our director of coaching, Suzanne Rassy, and Dr. Alex Sharp, this all seemed so simple and obvious I half wanted him to experience all the bad advice in the industry first so he could realize what a breakthrough we’d had.

You don't have to be a baseball fan to enjoy the book *Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game* or the blockbuster film starring Brad Pitt and Jonah Hill that was nominated for 6 Academy Awards. It's the story of an underdog overcoming the odds with incredible constraints by doing things.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

completely differently from everyone else. So often in sports, business, or life, people pay attention to the wrong thing but feel so confident about it because that's what everyone else does.

Baseball has been using statistics and metrics for decades. It was widely accepted that paying attention to batting averages, stolen bases, etc. was the way to judge players and find success. In 2002, the Oakland Athletics coach, Billy Beane, realized that he had a budget of $44 million but was competing against teams like the New York Yankees with over $125 million to spend on player salaries. Because of this, Billy realized he had to find the undervalued players and dig deeper to find what really mattered. Billy brought on a Yale economics graduate, Peter Brand, who built a completely different framework that uses metrics to evaluate players, which proved true and changed baseball forever:

I remember when I first realized that George Hariri could "see the Matrix" in a way that I couldn't. He was walking me through how he used Practice by Numbers to pilot his practice: "So I see this inflection mark to when I know I'm going to have a good month but also that we're maxed on capacity and that I need to expand." I personally was intimidated by the sheer volume of the metrics that Practice by Numbers could give you on a practice, but as George ran through everything he looked at on a daily, weekly, monthly basis, I knew we were on to something special. George had previously used his skills with numbers when we were analyzing practices for purchase: Now we were cracking the code on predictable practice growth:

Soon we had built our set of Shared Practices metrics that allowed us to coach dentists to predictably and sustainably grow their practice with confidence. Growth is inherently challenging, nonlinear, and often a leap of faith: To add operatories, a new hygienist; or even a new dentist to your practice is a significant investment and can feel like taking a blind step out into a chasm.
---
# FOREWORD

Hoping you don't fall. As we used these metrics to coach dentists to expand intelligently, we saw repeatable results and created a roadmap that anyone could follow. While a lot of the information in this book is already out there for free in our 600+ episodes of the Shared Practices podcast, we can't expect you to go on the same 7-year journey of podcasting, coaching, and growing that we went through to learn these lessons. We had to share this with the world, not only on the podcast and in our courses but in a condensed book.

Your practice, like the story of the Oakland Athletics in Moneyball, is the underdog: You face rising costs, challenges finding and retaining quality team members, insurance pressure, and increasing competition. You have to find ways to do more with less and provide a better experience for your patients and your team as you grow. Traditional industry advice, while well-meaning, can and will hold you back from what is possible. If you can set aside your preconceptions, we're happy to show you a new way to think about practice ownership that you can use to turn your practice into a vehicle for wealth, fulfillment, and doing good. Once you see it, you won't be able to think about dental practice ownership in any other way for the rest of your career.

Rck [
Founder and CEO,
Shared Practices

5
---
# INTRODUCTION

"What do you call a dentist who does 1 or 2 things right?"

— A millionaire.

I heard this from Howard Farran, founder of Dentaltown, when I was a first-year dental student: At the time, I was just starting dental school and deciding what path I wanted to take in my career. Richard, who I did not know at the time, arranged for Howard to visit my dental school as a guest lecturer to talk about dental practice management: He made the point that dentistry is a business with a lot of opportunity. The quote was his way of sharing a truth that I have come to understand over the years: dental practices are generally not run very well. However, it only takes 1 or 2 things done really well for a dentist to achieve a good amount of success.

The first thought I had upon hearing what Farran had to say was, "What happens if you do everything right?" That moment was when I made the decision to dedicate my entire career toward the search for the answer: In this book I will share what I discovered; at Shared Practices we call it Analytics Based Practice Management.

As I prepared for practice ownership, I was motivated by what was possible from operating a practice in the "perfect" way: I proceeded to focus all of my free time and attention on learning about dental practice management.
---
# INTRODUCTION

In 2017, I joined Richard Low on the Shared Practices podcast: He started the podcast in 2016 with the goal of sharing the industry's best practice management practices with everyone, hence the name Shared Practices. Our podcast focuses solely on dental practice management; and we’ve recorded over 600 episodes with dental practice management experts. Through all of these interviews, I ended up learning what I call the dental industry standard, the industry agreed-upon principles for the best known way of running a dental practice. In other businesses these are called "best practices" we call them "industry standard."

In 2018, I became a practice owner: I bought a practice that collected about $1.1 million in the prior 12 months. I had thought all my preparation had adequately prepared me, but boy, was I wrong: I bought a practice that historically collected around $90,000 per month. Initially, I was worried about reproducing $90,000 as a new practice owner. Quickly after I started at the practice, I began working with the hygiene team to implement a strong team-led case-acceptance process. My first month of ownership we collected $125,000. By my third month, collections climbed to $158,000. A few months into practice ownership, and I was the proud owner of an extremely profitable practice that was growing at an absurd rate. I thought I had it all figured out.

Once I started getting success early, I had my sights set on bigger numbers. My response was to hire additional staff so that the practice could grow even more. My seller had stayed on as an associate for 6 months. She told me she was retiring, and I decided to expand capacity: I hired a full-time associate dentist, an additional hygienist, an extra assistant, and an additional front-desk team member. I increased my monthly expenses from around $70,000 per month to $110,000 per month.

Then, something very unexpected happened. My practice tanked. All of the growth I had seemed to vanish overnight.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

January 2019 collections totaled $147,000.

February 2019 collections totaled $102,000.

By the time my practice tanked in February, my expenses were more than my new collections.

Overnight I went from making healthy profit to losing money each month.

For the first 6 months, I had the highest income I've ever had. For the next 6 months, I worked full-time as a dentist 4 days a week for free. I did not earn any money working full-time as a dentist for the following 6 months after my practice tanked:

I struggled with feeling like a failure and had imposter syndrome. In my career; 2019 was my rock bottom. Here I was, a practice management obsessed dentist who had a podcast helping other people learn how to get into practice ownership while I owned a practice that was not making any money:

The only way I survived that period without losing money was by working for free in the practice 4 days a week. All of the dentistry I produced was used to pay the practice's expenses. For 6 months, none of it made its way back to me:

During those 6 months after the practice slowed down, I was super confused and wondered:

- How did my practice drop so drastically in collections all of a sudden?
- What was I going to do now that my expenses were more than my collections?

I had 2 options:

1. Fire staff to reduce my expenses (1 dentist, 1 assistant, 1 hygienist; and 1 administrative staff member).
2. Grow my practice to get back to a profitable range given our size: $140,000 to $160,000 per month.
---
# InTRoduCTiON

I went back through every practice management book I had and searched for the answers about how to grow a dental practice. Nowhere in my mountain of information did I find a predictable and straightforward way: Every industry-standard best practice was pointed at only a part of the practice, such as the best way to answer a new-patient phone call. Don’t get me wrong; all of these individual pearls are valuable information. But none of them addressed my confusion regarding why my collections tanked suddenly and what I needed to do to grow my practice back into the range that would make it profitable. All these give you is the generally agreed-upon best strategy: it pearls. They told me nothing about my specific practice' $ problems.

Nonetheless, I went through my knowledge base of best practices for running a dental practice and identified 10 or so areas where I felt we could improve. This included training team members on responsibilities, using checklists, implementing hygiene productivity training, purchasing new equipment to increase treatment conversion, and a few other items. It created a lot of stress on my initial team. I was trying to change too many things at once, and they felt the impact: My staff told me they were overwhelmed with the number of new things that were being added to their plate: They had just gone from little change for 30 years to a new change every month. From my perspective, I was not willing to fire good team members and wanted to grow out of our financial problems. I felt my only choice was to try many different things to see what would work.

Nothing I tried led to significant growth: After 6 months of implementing new changes, my practice barely grew. Those next 6 months, collections hovered between $100,000 and $110,000 per month. I was still not making any money. I had organized everyone's functions and improved the way we did things, but I was not seeing any results hit the bottom line.

Finally one day, I broke through: I had what I now call my analytics epiphany, an epiphany that changed everything in my career: I will discuss.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

and explain my analytics epiphany several times throughout the book. My goal for you is to have an analytics epiphany while reading this book.

That day, I was going to speak at the business club at Midwestern University (Arizona), my alma mater: The feeling of imposter syndrome was getting to me again, so I decided to stop into the office to try to dive through our already numbers. At the time, I was using Practice by Numbers to inform my decisions at my practice.

One thing people need to know about me is that I am a big numbers guy. On my way to becoming a dentist, I ended up taking a lot of math classes in college, simply for fun: I chose to take those classes because I have always enjoyed solving problems with numbers. I love the black/white nature of mathematics. For every question, there is one right answer. No debate.

On this particular day, I tried to use my numerical skills to further understand what was happening in my practice. I put down my preconceived notions about what we were doing wrong and decided to look through the numbers to find the black/white answer regarding what my practice was doing so poorly: I started by projecting out what we should be collecting each month by looking through our patient flow and calculating an estimate of how much we should be collecting: The output of that calculation was the exact amount of collections my practice had the prior month: $110,000. I will walk through this math in more detail later in the book.

The epiphany: my practice is performing exactly as you would expect it to. This was a big light bulb moment for me. For months I had been struggling with imposter syndrome, thinking I was an awful practice owner. Yet, my practice was not doing anything wrong: It was performing exactly as you would have expected it to based on the number of patients we were seeing: I began to see the problem: we did not have enough patients for the number of team members in the practice.
---
# INTRODUCTION

After digging further through the numbers, I finally understood what was actually happening: Our diagnosis from existing patients was extremely high for the first 6 months. Then, diagnoses from existing patients tanked at the same time as practice collections tanked.

When I had bought my practice, I diagnosed the things I felt needed to be done for the patients I was seeing for the first time. I have always been a straight shooter and wanted to be honest with people. That is what led to the rapid growth I had experienced right away. All the existing patients to the practice were essentially new patients to me.

During those first 6 months, I was tricked. I thought I was a great business owner who was growing an extremely successful practice, but it turns out the growth was due to a lot of initial treatment I had diagnosed because I was very up-front about it with patients.

Because I was flying blind, I hired an additional dentist, hygienist, and assistant to continue to grow my practice further: I got too aggressive and wanted to grow even more, only to have the rug pulled out from under me when I saw those patients again for the second time. They had either completed the work or did not want to do it: That initial level of collections from my practice was not sustainable.

That is why my practice tanked! No longer was I confused. For the first time in my career of owning a dental practice, I had finally understood what was actually happening in my practice. The problem was, what was actually happening was so much different than what I had thought was happening.

This led to bad daily decision-making: I made incorrectly timed hires, inappropriate initiatives for growth, poor investments in marketing, and many other ill-informed practice management decisions.

I started seeing how much easier it is to guide the direction of your practice when you understand what is actually happening: After my analytics.
---
# DENTALMONEYBALL

epiphany, I finally understood why my practice was behaving the way it was. I also understood what I needed to do to get the desired collections range so I could earn an income again. Armed with this new perspective, I began to work on what was actually wrong with my practice, which was that we simply did not have enough patients for the number of team members, dentists, operatories, and office expenses.

I no longer felt like I was a failure. I realized I was doing a lot of things well; I was just missing the last piece to the puzzle.

Nine months after my epiphany was March of 2020. We will all remember this month as the month when COVID-19 shut down dental offices around the world. I will always remember it as the first month I was expected to break $200K but never did, thanks to the pandemic. It would have been my biggest month ever and nearly double the collections we had 9 months prior when I had my epiphany.

How did I go from flying by the seat of my pants for 12 months to doubling my practice the next 9 months? The answer and thorough explanation lies in this book. It is my reason for writing: I want to prevent dentists from feeling the same frustration and confusion I felt when nothing was working. My goal is to clearly and thoroughly outline the components of a dental practice. I will explain how they work together and how a thorough understanding of a dental practice can be used to create a predictable and repeatable process for practice growth: A dental practice is a predictable system of related inputs and outputs. Like any system, it can be manipulated to get a desired outcome.

Dentists spend so much money trying to grow their practices: continuing education courses, new equipment; bad marketing, and other failed initiatives. The reality is, it does not require a large financial investment to grow your practice. It simply requires a complete understanding of how a
---
# Introduction

A dental practice operates, combined with intentionality about which direction you'd like to take the practice. This book will teach you how to combine a solid sense of direction with consistent data-driven strategies to achieve your desired outcome. Practice growth can be a choice. You can have it if you want it, so long as you understand how to guide your ship toward growth:

# A Predictable Process for Practice Growth

This book will give you a roadmap for practice growth, a proven and predictable process that you can implement in any practice. During the COVID-19 lockdown, I began working with our team at Shared Practices to flesh out this new data-driven approach: We decided to call it Analytics Based Practice Management.

At the time of the writing of this book, our company, Shared Practices, has implemented our philosophy in over 100 clients' offices. Our coaching department has grown all of our clients' collections by an average of 39 percent in the first year we began working with them. During our second year, we grew all of our clients' collections by an average of 37 percent.

This book will layout our Analytics Based Practice Management philosophy so you, too, can understand how to unlock the growth available in your dental office.

My hope is that you will come to understand your practice in a new way; recognize how the different parts of the dental practice work together; and see how making changes to one part of the practice affects the practice as a whole. You'll know what's important to focus on and what's not: It is the clarity that comes from the metrics that is so valuable. It removes any doubt about whether or not you are working on the right component of your practice.

You will no longer have to wonder if you are doing the best thing for your practice. Even before I saw financial results from our philosophy, I took peace in knowing the only thing that needed to change was our patient flow.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

That clarity helped me focus my time and effort on the key problems facing my practice. Focusing time on those problems provides the largest return on time and money invested: in my opinion; it’s data-driven information that objectively shows you the best way to grow a dental practice.

So why should you listen to me? First; I’m a dentist like you. I’ve owned my own practice and grown it substantially. Often when speaking with industry experts, you will get advice from only one perspective. The marketing expert is looking at the practice through the marketing lens but not seeing the other perspectives that need to be considered. This is part of why the dental industry standard failed me. I was getting disjointed pieces of advice from many different people, none of whom understood what it is like being a dentist.

In my opinion, practice owners are the people who need to understand the practice and make holistic decisions considering all factors. Nobody is a greater expert on any given practice than the practice owner: They know the team, the patients, the clinical procedures offered, etc. They need to be the ones in charge and empowered to lead the direction of the dental practice forward.

Our philosophy allows breathing room for the individuality of each dental practice. We believe that the best direction of any dental practice is where the practice owner wants it to go. At Shared Practices, we take a dentist-first approach that respects the individuality of each practice.

Early in my career, I made the decision to specialize in business, and I’ve focused all my professional growth on learning all I could about owning and operating a dental practice. In 2020, I decided to put down the handpiece and pursue a fully nonclinical, practice management-focused career. Since then, I’ve become a multipractice.
---
Owner and have experience the next level of business in dentistry: I've gotten to learn all kinds of hard lessons about associates, growing too quickly, and the finances of a larger group.

# Podcast

Shared Practices has also changed a lot since I joined Richard on the podcast back in 2017. In addition to being a practice management education and consulting company, we decided we wanted to own practices and build a team of like-minded doctors through Shared Practices.

In 2021, Shared Practices expanded its scope to also include the direct ownership of dental practices. We started a dental support organization (DSO) called Shared Practices Group. One year after we started Shared Practices Group, we were named one of the fastest-growing groups in dentistry. Currently, we are opening denture and implant practices across the US at an unprecedented rate. When I began writing this book, we had a total of 8 practices. As I am editing this 1 year later, we have 20 practices. Point being, when it comes to owning and operating dental practices, we practice what we preach.

My role at Shared Practices is chief financial officer and chief innovation officer. At our current size, we have internal employees for our marketing, accounting, call center, legal, and project management teams. We do not work with any outside firms to operate our dental practices. We now internally manage professionals to do the work that dentists usually outsource. This has forced us as a company to learn a lot about all of the different facets of dental practice management and build departments that live up to the Shared Practices standard, a standard that includes a holistic perspective and data-driven decisions.

We own and operate General Practices, as well as Specialty Dentures and Implants practices. Shared Practices is a unique blend of many leaders' opinion and practice models. We are a company owned equally by 6 entrepreneurial dentists who are all talented in various facets of dental practice ownership.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

In addition to the 6 partners, we hire with the idea of bringing the brightest minds in dental practice management into our company, unlike many dental consulting companies that are built on the back of one dentist's ideas or one style of practice. When we first began coaching dentists on our metrics-focused philosophy, our third partner, Dr. Matt Guarino, and I were the ones doing the coaching: While we achieved success working directly with dentists, we did not have the ability to train team members on our data-driven strategies.

We had a big breakthrough when we brought in Suzanne Rassy as our director of coaching: Suzanne had previously led a department of over 30 in-office consultants at one of the larger practice management companies. We felt she could take our philosophy to the next level. When we brought her on, we realized there was only so much we could accomplish only coaching the dentist: Together with Suzanne, we built the framework that has delivered all of the results you will read about in this book. We did that by working directly with dental practice teams. Suzanne made our philosophy come to life.

This book is written by me, but expresses our collective views at Shared Practices: Our mutually agreed-upon framework has delivered unbelievable yet repeatable results for our clients. One thing we love to do on the Shared Practices podcast is dive deep into real case studies. There is only so much you can learn without looking at real-life examples. This is where our popular podcast segment Practice Underwater came from. We change dentists' names and voices, so we can talk through their real numbers.

I will be showcasing real clients, who represent a variety of different practice models; and who have benefited from our philosophy: I will show real data from their offices in the time that we have worked with them to further illustrate how to turn our philosophy into real results. For each case study, I reached out to the client and talked through their story. You will see the unique challenges each practice owner faces along their journey toward their dream.
---
# InTRoduCTiON

These case studies will appear throughout to help us dive deeper into key subjects.

I will now walk through our first client case study using Dr. Amanda Remer-Chang's practice as an example. I will take you through her journey in practice ownership to highlight things to come in the book and to provide a flavor for the real case studies. The purpose of each case is to show you a real example of what is possible. Not only what is possible, but how each case-study dentist achieved their goals.

In 2017, Amanda started working as an associate in the practice she ended up purchasing with the understanding that she would acquire the practice in May of 2020. Often what we see when a dentist enters into an associate-to-own scenario is that the timeline they were initially promised gets extended. This certainly was true for Amanda, who had to wait until June of 2021 to acquire the practice. During that time, she entertained leaving for other opportunities but ultimately decided to purchase the office she had been working at for years.

Amanda started working with a coach immediately upon buying the practice; her reasoning was due to the team that she had inherited. She felt the previous owner was too laid-back as an owner; and Amanda wanted to change the employees' mindsets around their roles in the office. She used her coach, Traci, to help instill a new culture that leads to greater office productivity.

Here's a blurb from Amanda, which we will also have for each case study: Amanda's is unique in that we grabbed a testimonial from her shortly after her fourth month working with us, before she even got the results we will report, which is likely after what we call Phase 1. You will learn more about the phases of implementation during Part 3 of the book.

I decided to start coaching with Shared Practices after listening to the podcast, getting ready to purchase my first dental practice; knowing it needed to grow, but having no idea how to do it or where to start.
---
# DENTAL MONeyBALL

I started off working with Suzanne for a brief time as I was doing my due diligence for the practice I ultimately purchased. She was so knowledgeable and patient with all the questions I had. I knew the practice needed some changes, but I had a hard time knowing where to start and how to make those changes happen. Suzanne reassured me that is what they do best, and she was right!

Once I purchased my practice and was ready for one-on-one coaching, I was paired up with a coach. She has been amazing so far: We have only been working together for about 3 months, but it honestly feels like we've been working together forever. She has become more than just my coach. She is part of our dental team as well as a friend. Traci has pushed me out of my comfort zone to really help me and the practice grow. I have had to make some financial decisions that have put pits in my stomach, but now I am so happy I have made them.

I love seeing the growth my practice has had in just 4 short months and I am super excited to see where we can take this practice in the future. I couldn't have done it without the Shared Practices coaching program.

Amanda talked about how she decided to pursue her goals of being a practice owner from hearing about others doing it on the podcast. She felt sharing her story in this book came full circle for her.

When Amanda started with us in July 2021, she was the new owner of a practice that had historically collected $745,000 in the last 12 months. For all of our client data, we always set our benchmark as the trailing 12 months collections based on the date when they start working with us.

At the end of 2022, Amanda had collected over $1,350,000. From where she started, that is 81 percent growth in 16 months.

# In Chapter 2, we will display

18
---
# intRoducTiON

what we call Practice-OlK, where you will understand how practice growth is a net-worth cheat code: That is where I will walk through our second real casestudy, Dr. Derek Green.

Amanda grew her practice using 2 different vehicles. She increased the number of patients in her patient base, while also improving her practice's productivity per patient. In Chapter 3, You will learn more about these 2 different ways of growing a practice:

Amanda improved her patient flow using the Dental 3-Pointer. When she started with us, she had 9.5 days a week of hygiene. Her practice averaged 14 new patients per month:

By the end of 2022, using the Dental 3-Pointer, she grew her patient base to 12 days a week of hygiene. She also doubled her new-patient flow, seeing 28 patients per month:

We implement the steps required to shoot the Dental 3-Pointer; which you will learn about; in the first coaching phase of our program. This usually takes 3 to 4 months.

During the next phase, Phase 2, we improve the practice's efficiency: This is the second way to grow a dental practice; increasing your productivity per patient: Amanda did so by increasing her treatment retention. We will discuss treatment retention in depth in Chapter 5.

|Doctor|Department|Started|Decrease|
|---|---|---|---|
|Diagnosis (earliest data Sept 2021)|32*|37%|16%|
|Patient Acceptance|758|98*|319|
|Treatment Acceptance|89*|652| |
---
# DENTALMONEyBALL

You may be a little confused about why her treatment acceptance went down. Yet; her practice grew by 81 percent: This will make a lot more sense after reading Chapter 5, where we will do our third case study to dive deeper into treatment retention: The short answer is that Amanda schedules more treatment because she diagnoses more, even if a lower percentage of people say yes.

Amanda's practice began as a Solo practice, although her seller worked for her one day a week during her first 18 months of ownership. Right after Amanda bought the practice, she found out she was expecting: She decided to have her husband, who is also a dentist, join her practice before she went on maternity leave. Currently, Amanda and her husband are 2 full-time dentists running what we call a Profitable Group. The 81 percent growth we reported earlier included a 4-month maternity leave where Amanda was not in the office. Amanda and her husband are excited for 2023 and to see what they can do working the whole year together: They are currently in the process of buying their building and expanding from 6 to 12 operatories. Their long-term goal is to grow into what we call a Mega Group. You will learn all about these various practice avatars in Chapter 7, and we will walk you through the stages of growth in a dental office in Chapter 9.

I asked Amanda what her biggest challenges have been: She talked about the fear she experienced every time she was faced with an investment into the practice. When she first started working with us, her coach urged her to equip 2 more operatories, expanding from 4 to 6. In hindsight; she is thankful she made these types of decisions, but they were challenging decisions to make in the moment: She also talked about how big of a challenge it was to create a new mindset among her existing employees. This was her primary reason for signing up for coaching: Moving forward, she is excited to keep growing her practice and move toward a larger practice with more dentists that allows for additional flexibility for her and her husband.
---
# INTRODUCTION

Looking at Amanda's journey, there are a lot of in-depth topics to cover when it comes to growing a dental practice. I hope you are ready to dive in.

Just a heads up, this book is not light reading: It is meant to be very informative and give you the mindset you need to succeed.

# What Do You Really Want?

It's often difficult for dentists to believe they can do what they want. So often they temper their practice and don't allow themselves to ask: what do I really want?

When we begin working with a client, we begin by asking them what their ideal practice and life looks like. That vision is what we care about building with them: They often begin with the furthest extent of what they think is possible, not knowing there is more out there.

I'm here to tell you, whatever you deeply want is within reach: We've helped clients create all kinds of unique practices. Whether you want to work zero days clinically or 4 to 5 days a week clinically, it is all possible.

What types of procedures do you want to do? What days do you want to work? How much do you want to make? Whatever is important to you, I encourage you to have the courage to write it down on a piece of paper.

My motivation for writing this book is to provide a guide for getting whatever it is you really want in life so you can use your dental practice as the ultimate tool to serve yourself your ideal life.

If you trust our process, allow yourself to be honest with what you want; stretch your mind, and consider beyond what you had thought was possible.
---
# DENTALMONEYBALL

you will realize there is more out there. That your practice can be even greater than you had imagined. And that it s all within reach:

This book will walk you through the data-driven process to get to wherever it is You want to go.

I will begin Part 1 by outlining what is wrong with the dental industry standard. I will also break down what moneyball is and then relate that back to the dental practice: In Chapter 3, I will discuss the new winning strategies data has revealed for dental practice ownership. One of which is what we call the Dental 3-Pointer.

After I've introduced a data-driven mindset in Part 1, I will discuss the various components of a dental practice: That part of the book, Part 2, is very dense: I thoroughly explain how to operate each component of your practice in the most advantageous way possible.

Part 3 will be all about action. Taking the mindset of Part 1 and the information in Part 2, Part 3 will apply these principles. I will discuss the avatars we use in depth and how to classify your practice. Then, I'll wrap with generalized case studies (not real clients) illustrating common struggles we see at the various stages of the growth of a dental practice.

The 4 other case studies from real clients will be sprinkled throughout the book, the way Amanda $ was in this Introduction: Each real case study was selected to elaborate on a specific topic using a real example.

This book is intended to be a guide to demystify a dental practice. It is intended to empower You, the practice owner, to guide your own ship: I invite You to use the mindset, framework, and principles to create the life you deserve:

22
---
# PART

# WHATS WRONG WITH THE DENTAL INDUSTRY STANDARD
---
# CHAPTER 1

# INDUSTRY STANDARDS

In 2002, Billy Beane, then general manager of the Oakland Athletics, changed sports forever:

Baseball teams with larger fan bases are able to spend more money on players, creating an unfair game in Major League Baseball that favors the teams in bigger markets that have more money. Beane did something to level the playing field. He looked at players from a purely numbers perspective: Baseball had, like every other industry, standards by which it made decisions. Scouts would look at players based on long-time agreed-upon principles. What Beane discovered with his new approach was that some players were overvalued and some players were undervalued.

Using this numbers-based approach, the Oakland Athletics were able to be very competitive in 2002 and 2003 and made the playoffs despite having a payroll that was a fraction of the other teams that made the playoffs. Prior to Billy Beane, this type of success was unprecedented in baseball and sports in general.

The concept of using an analytical approach to gain an advantage became known as 'moneyball' as a result of Michael Lewis's book *Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game*.

Moneyball strategies have now been used in all the major sports to create new winners. Prior to using an analytical approach, the Golden State
---
# INDUSTRY STANDARDS

Warriors were a laughing stock in basketball. In their entire franchise history, they had never had any significant success. Since the data revolution in the NBA, they have had more NBA championships than any other franchise.

With the use of data, every single sport has seen a big change in the winning strategy. Prior to moneyball, teams would rely on the way it's always been done or industry experts with a lot of experience to dictate their decision-making: This is known as following the industry standard.

# What You Don't Know Can Hurt You

For a long time, the basketball industry standard was to play a slow game and take responsible shots. This led to players taking long 2-pointers (within the 8 to 14-foot range), which coaches, some with 25 years of experience, thought was the best decision to take. These valid decisions resulted from coaches' valuable experiences and what was known to be effective at the time.

Similar to how basketball industry standards dictated how coaches and their teams played games, dental industry standards dictate the operation of dental practices. The industry standard forms when practice brokers, consultants, accountants, and others interact with dentists. In their interactions, they offer advice within their narrow field of expertise. Accountants repeat the same general pieces of advice. So do practice brokers and consultants.

These pieces of advice are not inherently wrong: They are simply incomplete. They only look at the problem from one angle. The accountant sees what is best from their accounting lens. The dental marketing expert is looking at things only through the perspective of new-patient flow.

What ends up getting missed is a perspective that factors in a holistic view of a practice. Beginning with the owner's vision and including the interconnectedness of the entire dental practice.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

None of the components of a dental practice exist in a vacuum; they all affect each other:

Later, we will discuss in detail the importance of patient retention: It is essential to the long-term growth of a dental practice. That should be one of the bigger takeaways from reading this book.

One time, I was speaking with one of the leading experts on dental marketing; this individual has one of the most respected marketing companies in dentistry. This industry expert told me that he advises his clients against prebooking hygiene patients. From his narrow perspective, existing patients clog openings that could be filled with new patients.

From a holistic data-driven perspective, this is one of the most damaging pieces of advice I've ever heard. Yet, one of dentistry's leading experts on marketing has likely influenced many dentists to adopt this awful piece of practice management advice.

Because these professionals have been doing the same thing for the past 25 years, they are unaware that they may be providing bad, out-of-date advice to the modern dentist. That leads to an echo chamber of bad advice.

And to dentists listening and adhering to that advice: Because everyone is following this advice, it is backed by the industry's experts. Back when we were recording Season 2 of the Shared Practices podcast, dental practices used to be priced around 2/3 to 3/4 of the prior 12 months' collections. Instead of basing the sale price on profitability, as other businesses do in almost every other industry, the dental industry used to focus on the false belief that you should, as the person selling your practice, receive a percentage of the previous 12 months' collections.

26
---
# INDUSTRY STANDARDS

It's been like that for the past 50 years. Recently with the consolidation in dentistry, this has changed: Now dental practices are valued more based on their profitability than in the past.

One time, I asked a practice broker, "Why are dental practices sold in a way that makes very little financial sense?" His response was that when dentists are in dental school, they learn in their practice management class that their practice is worth 2/3 to 3/4 of the 12 months' collections. So brokers were forced to value them this way because that is what both the buying dentist and the selling dentist expected.

Using this industry standard leads to overvaluing some practices and undervaluing others. Sounds a lot like what happened with the industry-standard scouts in baseball. And it makes no sense.

Again, it's what we learned in dental school; it's how we were taught it should be done—simply because that's been the dental industry standard for years. Once outsiders came into dentistry, this industry standard started fading away: Now dental practices are valued more based on their profitability, the way other businesses are usually valued.

Outdated dental industry standards also apply to how you run your practice. You might think you're following industry best practices, that you're going to work every day—and running your practice effectively, but the reality is that you are most likely not: I would venture to guess that half the things you've always done are not as effective as you think.

It’s holding your practice back from its true potential. It’s holding you back from the true results you could be getting for the effort you put into your practice, because some of what you are doing is working against you:

27
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# Dental Accountants

If there is one industry expert to home in on, it's dental accountants. They are the industry's most trusted advisors and have a lot of influence over how practices operate. Dental accountants make reactive decisions because they historically look at past numbers.

Because dentists trust their accountants, they ask: 'How am I doing? What could I do better?' Unfortunately, the main yardstick accountants have is to compare percentages from a profit and loss statement between offices.

(Umm, it looks like you're spending too much on marketing, and when you hired that new hygienist, it bumped your staff costs too high, so that's not good.)

It is not that these observations are wrong; they are simply incomplete. If not fully understood, recommendations from your dental accountant can directly impede the growth of your practice:

- Accountants make decisions by comparing dentists to one another: That’s a problem because decisions are not personalized to each specific practice.
- Benchmarks don't apply to everyone, yet everyone is shoved into them.
- There is no accounting for the local market; insurance fees for a specific office, staffing costs, or the individuality of each practice. Yet that's the industry standard in dentistry because it's the way accountants have always looked at things: Through their very narrow lens.

The dental accountant has influenced the industry standard by doing the following:

1. Using a reactive historical perspective to make decisions acknowledging the individuality between offices.
2. Not considering all factors when making a decision.
---
# INDUSTRY STANDARDS

The Shared Practices philosophy looks at every practice management decision on an individual basis. When making a decision, we look at the impact of that decision and how it impacts the different parts of the practice. Most importantly, we make our decisions with the owner's long-term vision in mind, the specific challenges of their growth path, and we use a data-driven approach to get there.

# Additional Industry Standards That Don't Work

Seminars: If you go to a seminar, they give you a bunch of checklists based on industry standards that show you how to organize your practice. They state that if you implement the items on the checklist, it will grow your practice. But the checklist items don't grow your practice because the checklists don't show you what to do in specific situations. They're cookie-cutter rather than individualized. Every change you introduce to your practice takes significant time and effort to implement: The result after implementing these checklists is better organization of duties, not practice growth.

Staff overhead: Industry standard is to look at staff overhead percentages based on the office's total revenue to determine if an office is overstaffed or understaffed. That's not a good way to make a decision for a growing practice: Another issue is that staff overheads in different states are compared to one another: You can't compare a dentist's staffing costs in California to one in Utah or Texas. A practice needs to be staffed at the appropriate level to optimize the owner's take-home pay or overall happiness. If an additional clinical team member can increase production enough to increase the dentist's monthly take-home from $30,000 to $33,000, they should be added to expand production capacity, even if the staff overhead goes from 26 to 28 percent: In our current industry standard, these types of hires are evaluated by looking at a staff overhead.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Overhead percentage rather than looking at the best thing for the practice. The result is some practices may be staffed incorrectly, leading to a lower take-home pay for the owner than what is possible.

# Minimize hygiene openings:

If you listen to those touting the industry standard to minimize hygiene openings, you will impede the growth of your practice. One of our industry standards' favorite things to do in a practice is to improve hygiene profitability. One of the ways they do this is by removing openings. Minimizing hygiene openings is an awful idea; you are essentially choosing hygiene department profitability over practice growth. Another way of putting it, stepping over dollars for pennies. You'll learn later in this book what we call the Dental 3-Pointer. It is the strategic advantage that data has highlighted in dentistry: Part of this strategy involves creating intentional openings in hygiene. You are holding your practice back by not using Strategic Hygiene Openings as fuel to grow.

With the advances we have had in dental practice analytics, it's essential to think of things in a new and more modern way. This broken paradigm of thinking about dental practice management is holding you back in ways you may not have realized.

You must see the whole picture instead of looking at your practice with information you've received from accountants, consultants, and other professionals who only see things from their own perspective.

- Each practice is different:
- Each dentist is different:
- Each dentist diagnoses differently:
- Each dentist has patient bases with needs for different services than those other dentists provide:
- Each dentist receives different insurance reimbursements.

30
---
# INDUSTRY STANDARDS

Each dentist compensates staff at different levels. Each dentist has different numbers of operatories in their offices. And each dentist has different goals for his or her life.

There are so many reasons why each practice is different; yet we rely on an industry standard that categorizes them as all the same. You can't treat all practices the same: You can't treat them according to the industry standard that's based on reactive historical information and an inferior decision-making process and expect the practices to grow.

# What It's Costing You

In most dental practices, there are one or two major things that will lead to the largest results or growth: These are known as bottlenecks, and they are holding your practice back from growth. Unless you are doing one of those things that addresses a specific bottleneck, it won't impact your practice because there are bottlenecks somewhere else. You might get a little growth, but growing your practice by more than 30 percent requires you to address your bottlenecks.

Think back to my story. For the first 12 months of my career, prior to my epiphany, I was flying blind. I was driving my practice by looking in the rearview mirror: The way dental accountants have taught us to do. I was making disjointed decisions in my practice that were not addressing my unique bottleneck. Without data, I did not have any clarity on what my practice needed. I was simply wasting my effort on smaller improvements that were not addressing the bigger issues.

The many components of a dental practice are like oars on a rowboat. You want the oars to be rowing in the same direction so that you have momentum and the boat moves faster.
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

If you implement changes that do not address your bottlenecks, you create friction within your team because you’re trying something new. And every time you try something new, there’s a culture cost due to the inevitable frustrations that come with trying new things, and that makes the team more resistant to additional changes in the future. To make matters worse, the effort may not get you anywhere because you may be improving something that doesn't need to be improved unknowingly. The one thing you’re doing in your practice might be hurting something else because you’re not understanding the whole picture: As a result, you’re not moving the rowboat: You could even be rowing backward!

If you make decisions from a reactive perspective by looking at historical data (like accountants do), it’s similar to rowing a boat while looking behind you: If you look at what’s behind instead of what’s in front; you make lower-quality decisions because you’re looking at where you came from instead of where you want to go. You might even crash into rocks and sink. By looking ahead, you could potentially go in a new direction; you could steer around those rocks and avoid them altogether: You could aim for the future you are trying to build.

A common example of this is if you employ a hygiene strategy that minimizes openings. You’re trading short-term profitability for long-term practice growth, and you might not even know it: Your hygiene strategy is now rowing in the opposite direction of where you’d like to go, if growth is your goal.

The ultimate cost when following these industry standards is that you’re rowing harder and harder and achieving fewer results. You’re trying to change things; you’re putting in the work: You row and row and think it will take you forward, that all you need to do is navigate that one obstacle and then you can row around it.

But you can't. You’re just stuck on a rock or a bottleneck. You must look ahead, determine where that rock is, and navigate around it.
---
# INDUSTRY STANDARDS

There is a unique power that comes from discovering your bottlenecks. The moment you find your true bottlenecks, you have a burst of clarity and conviction to do exactly what your practice needs the most. Very rarely as an entrepreneur do you get the assurance of "I'm working on the most important thing" because of the sheer volume of tasks and decisions to be made. Having clarity that you are working on the right change fuels your ability to implement change despite challenges, team resistance, and distractions.

It’s not about doing more work to get better results; it’s about doing different work. It’s about being strategic with what you focus on. Looking at the whole picture and picking the items that will make a difference in your practice. When growing a practice, we try to focus on one thing per department because we’re not trying to change too much at once. We want to see you achieve growth without having to work harder for the same results or less.

# Takeaways

1. The old-fashioned way of making decisions based on historical information (reactive perspective) leads to poorer-quality decisions. You are refocusing on the past (where you came from) instead of the future (where you want to go).
2. Using a cookie-cutter approach to dental practices is an example of poor decision-making: No two practices are the same. To grow your practice, you must customize your approach based on your particular situation and needs.
3. When following industry standards, you are doing more work and getting fewer results, and you may not even know it.
4. More growth and better results do not require more effort. They require a better decision-making process, which we’ll discuss in the next chapter.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

As you can see, adhering to industry standards is not a good way to grow your dental practice. Focusing on the past instead of the future keeps your practice from growing, because it keeps you from moving forward.

In the following chapter; we'll look at the general decision-making processes through a different lens than the usual industry standards. That lens is an Analytics Based Mindset. In the subsequent chapter; we will show how it relates to dentistry:

34
---
# CHAPTER 2

# ANALYTICS BASED MINDSET

When the general manager for the Houston Rockets, Daryl Morey (one of the most successful general managers and now president of the Philadelphia 76ers), was hired by the Houston Rockets in 2007, he implemented an analytics based strategy that had already proven successful in baseball. In basketball, it is known as Moreyball because of how much basketball changed following Daryl Morey entering the league. Morey was not a traditional industry expert with tons of experience when he took the Rockets job. His background was a computer science degree from Northwestern and an MBA from MIT.

At first, everyone thought using numbers solely to dictate strategy was crazy: Suddenly, the Houston Rockets were shooting more 3-pointers than anyone had ever seen in the history of the NBA. For years, industry experts said the strategy would not equate to wins in the NBA because it was too reckless. After years of working on it, the Rockets broke through: In 2018, they had one of the most efficient offenses in NBA history. Daryl Morey won Executive of the Year; and the Rockets were a Chris Paul injury away from an NBA championship.

Turns out, the old basketball industry standard we discussed in the previous chapter was not the most effective and efficient way to win games.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

It was no longer best to take long 2-pointers at the expense of 3-pointers. Analytics showed that the percentage of shots made from between 8 and 14 feet away from the hoop (2-pointer) and those made from behind the 3-point arc were made at similar rates. Therefore, if you are going to take a shot from more than 8 feet away, it makes more sense to take the 3-pointer and gain the extra point when the shot is made.

|3-Pointers are made|30-35% of the time|
|---|---|
|Close 2-Point shots are made|45-50% of the time|
|Mid-Range 2-Point shots are made|35-40% of the time|

Analytics showed NBA teams that they neglected to consider the impact of a 3-pointer being worth 50 percent more points than a 2-point shot: When teams started using a data-driven approach, they started realizing that taking advantage of the 3-pointer would allow them to score more points and ultimately win more games.

Teams that have adapted an Analytics Based Mindset are winning at a much higher rate than those who adhere to the old industry standards. Just look at 36.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MinDSET

The Golden State Warriors. They used a data-driven approach to win 4 championships. They’re the golden standard when it comes to winning in the modern NBA.

In dentistry, like in basketball, you can change the game and grow your practice if you stop adhering to industry standards and understand and implement a new Analytics Based Mindset. Like basketball, dentistry has analytical advantages, like the Dental 3-Pointer, that you can use as a data-driven way to grow your practice. In the next chapter, I will outline what we call the Dental 3-Pointer, compare it to the current industry standard 2-point shot, and show why our Dental 3-Pointer leads to growth. After this, you will see why we’ve built our practice management philosophy around the Dental 3-Pointer.

# Why Go for Growth?

The subject of this book is how to use a data-driven approach to grow your dental practice. Before we begin to outline how to use it to grow your practice, let’s first address why we suggest growing your practice.

Practice growth has many benefits from a lifestyle perspective and a financial perspective.

From a lifestyle perspective, the benefits of growth are very unique to each practice owner. Everyone values different things: Some dentists are motivated by the lifestyle benefits that come with a large income. Others are motivated by a practice that allows for time off to travel. Some dentists are most fulfilled by doing a certain set of procedures, like limiting their procedure mix to cosmetic cases.

When I bought my practice, I thought I wanted to be a super productive clinical dentist: In Chapter 5, I will talk about how I produced $800/hour as a clinician. What I learned from doing that is how much doing clinical.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Dentistry stressed me out: I started noticing I would feel relieved when patients would cancel their appointments. Until I became an owner; I did not know this about myself. I thought I would be content doing clinical dentistry every day for my entire career. When we were forced to take time off during the COVID-19 pandemic, I became aware of how much more I enjoyed the work I do at Shared Practices. When it came time to go back, I decided to hire an associate to replace myself at the office.

The reality is, larger practices allow the practice owner more freedom with their time. Larger practices also require more management structure, which allows the practice to operate without the owner always being around. Evolving from technician to manager to entrepreneur as you grow your practice requires a lot from you. As a leader, you must set clear expectations with team members, implement finely tuned systems and protocols, and address concerns in meetings. The larger you get; the more structured your practice will have to be: This was the part of practice ownership I loved.

To operate a larger practice, you need a strong leadership team in place. Having a full-time office manager (we'll talk about what constitutes a true office manager later) will enable you to take days off, knowing your business will still be there when you return. Having a larger well-run practice enables you, as a dentist, to have a higher quality of life both in and out of your practice.

Growing my practice to a Profitable Group allowed me the opportunity to step back clinically. A practice of that size kicked off enough profit to sustain my living expenses, which allowed me to put down the handpiece to pursue a nonclinical career. Growing my practice allowed me the financial freedom to pursue my passion, which is my role at Shared Practices.

We find that a lot of dentists feel a sense of relief when the practice is no longer solely dependent on them to operate: There is a freeing feeling for a practice owner when they can be somewhere else outside of their practice.

38
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MinDseT

During regular business hours and have the practice still operate well. When you build a team to operate the day-to-day, you break the shackle between yourself and the practice.

In complete contrast to me, later in this chapter; we will discuss our second real case study, Dr. Derek Green. He is a skilled clinician who loves the surgical side of dentistry. As you will see, he worked to grow his practice to allow time for him to focus on life-changing dentistry while associates handle the bread-and-butter dentistry.

For Derek, having management infrastructure in his office allowed him to focus on complex clinical dentistry: Derek wanted the ability to focus on bigger cases and did not want to be bothered with all of the management responsibilities. Growing his practice with an empowered office manager allowed his practice to grow while he was focusing on complex cases, the part of dentistry he was the most passionate about.

Whatever your passion is within dentistry, practice growth often allows you to move closer to whatever makes your heart sing; which ultimately leads to a more fulfilling career.

From a financial perspective, a larger practice increases both your income and your net worth: More revenue allows you to dilute the fixed expenses required to pay every single month. These include rent, loan payments, utilities, and other fixed monthly expenses. The majority of dental practice expenses are pretty consistent month over month: The more money your practice collects, the more excess profits you will have after paying all of your regular expenses.

As a practice owner, you get paid in 2 different ways: (1) for producing dentistry with your own 2 hands and (2) profit as income from owning the business and running it efficiently. People usually lump this into one number because they do not count how much they are supposed to pay themselves.

39
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

to do the dentistry: Separating these two helps a practice owner see that they can grow their income by increasing the size of their practice, even if they do not perform any extra dentistry. Profitability is usually a percentage of overall collections. The larger the practice, the larger the profit from owning the practice:

But the largest financial benefit is not seen in your income; it is seen in your net worth. The fastest way for you to grow your net worth is by growing your practice:

# Practice-OIK versus 401(k)

At Shared Practices, we have a term known as Practice-OlK. Whether you entered ownership through a startup or an acquisition, you have a set amount of practice debt: Your Practice-OlK balance is the amount of equity you have in your practice.

It is a place where you, the owner, store wealth that is tied up with certain rules on how to get that money into your checking account: Just like a 401(k). But unlike a 401(k), a Practice-OlK can more than double or triple in a short period of time, regardless of market trends and cycles. This active vehicle for growing wealth as a dentist can be more powerful than any passive investment: And unlike investing in the stock market, real estate, or other businesses, you have direct control of your risk, growth, and long-term trajectory:

# Let’s say you buy the following practice:

|Annual Collections:|$1 million|
|---|---|
|Purchase Price:|$800,000|
|Practice Loan:|$850,000 (includes working capital)|
|Starting Practice-OIK Balance:|~$50,000|
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MinDSET

Now, if you used an analytics based philosophy to grow this office 80 percent (we do this routinely) in 18 months, the updated balance in your Practice-O1K account looks like this:

|Annual Collections:|$1.8 million|
|---|---|
|Practice Value:|$1.6 million (larger practices sell for a larger percent of collections)|
|Practice Debt:|$800,000 (paid down $50,000 throughout the first 18 months)|
|Practice-O1K Balance:|$800,000|

That is real wealth a practice owner earned in just 18 months! You can liquidate by refinancing your loan to pull some cash out. You can sell partnerships or you can sell the entire practice.

How long would it take you to save $800,000 right now? Even a practice owner with an income of $500,000+ has to pay significant taxes, support a lifestyle, and pay down debt. With an optimistic savings rate of $120,000 per year; it would take over 5 years to save $800,000 versus 18 months of concentrated practice growth:

# Real Case Study - Practice-O1K

I’d like to dive deeper into the Practice-O1K by discussing our second real client case study. Our second featured dentist is Dr. Derek Green, a dentist who bought his practice and immediately turned to coaching with Shared Practice. Throughout the story, I will update his Practice-O1K balance so you can see it grow over time, as if it were a 401(k) where you could log in and check the balance.

Derek acquired a fixer-upper practice in May of 2021. The practice had been on decline and was losing patients at a fast rate. The prior 12 months collections, prior to him acquiring the practice, were around $375,000. He acquired the practice for $300,000, and his initial practice loan included extra money for improvements and equipment purchases.
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

Here is his starting Practice-OK balance:

|Annual Collections:|$375,000|
|---|---|
|Practice Value:|$300,000|
|Practice Loan:|$465,000|
|Starting Practice-OK Balance:|-$165,000|

As you can see, his initial investments in the practice put him at a negative starting position: A negative equity amount is common at the very beginning of practice ownership: In Derek's case, he equipped additional operatories and added the ability to place implants in his practice.

Derek is very clear on his personality; he describes himself as a Super Solo. His vision is to grow his practice into a Mega Group with 3-4 dentists. Super Solo and Mega Group are 2 of the practice avatars we use to analyze practices and navigate their growth. You will learn more about these avatars and practice models in Chapter 7. Derek wants to focus only on surgery and bigger cases, while his associates handle the bread-and-butter dentistry.

Derek began coaching with us at the same time that he bought his practice: One of the reasons he decided to do so was because of his office manager: Knowing he was a heavy producer; Derek knew he needed an office manager to handle a lot of the operations in a growing practice. The office manager he inherited is a former dental assistant who he felt could benefit from coaching:

Here is Derek's testimonial in his own words:

I knew I needed coaching when I purchased my first practice, but there were many to choose from: I decided on Shared Practices because to me, the company seemed to be the most innovative and had an objective approach to get my Solo practice to a Profitable Group practice.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MindseT

2 years in, and I am very happy with the training and the coaching that I've received. My Shared Practices coach has helped me and my office manager focus on the most important areas of my practice. We grew 164 percent in our first year! I've now hired a full-time associate, and we are so happy with the results. Can't recommend Shared Practices enough!

# Let’s check in with Derek's Practice-O1K balance after his 164 percent growth:

|Annual Collections (after year 1):|$990,000|
|---|---|
|Estimated Practice Value:|$850,000|
|Practice Loan:|$425,000|
|Practice-O1K Balance (after year 1):|$425,000|

Derek's strength as a productive dentist allowed him to grow his practice immediately: As you can see, in his first 12 months of ownership, he grew his Practice-O1K balance from -$165,000 to $425,000. That is a $590,000 increase in Derek's net worth in 12 months!

After his first year of ownership, he got thrown a curveball. His landlord forced him out of his location, and he was forced to move his practice. Derek decided to double down on his desire for a MegaGroup. Derek took on an additional $1,000,000 in debt to physically build a 12 operatory practice. Derek practices in Alaska, where it costs him a lot more than it typically would have elsewhere to do this type of construction project.

During his second year of ownership, Derek continued to grow his practice to the point where he is about to add his first associate. The practice now has 3 times as many patients as when he purchased it.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Here is his current Practice-0K balance:

|Annual Collections (from trailing 12 months' collections):|$2,180,000|
|---|---|
|Estimated Practice Value:|$2,100,000|
|Current Practice Debt:|$1,400,000|
|Current Practice-OIK Balance:|$700,000|

As you can see, Derek has made a significant investment in his practice, moving it to a 12 operatory location. Even with all of the twists and turns in his journey, he has still accrued $700,000 of equity in his practice. If he wanted to sell the entire practice, or a portion, he could transfer that balance to his personal checking account:

His goal is to keep growing his practice using our Analytics Based Practice Management strategies to the point where he can have up to 4 dentists working in that single office, which would allow him the opportunity to focus on life-changing dentistry while managing a large practice:

When I spoke with him, he mentioned that the journey has added a lot of stress in his life but that it was totally worth it: Growth can be challenging and stressful, but ultimately with time, those growing pains fade. Derek is very grateful for the growth he has had and is excited to keep pushing for his ultimate goal of a MegaGroup.

From a financial standpoint, it makes a lot of sense to grow your business. From a qualitative standpoint (quality of life), additional infrastructure allows you to decrease how dependent the practice's operations are on you:

We will talk about this more in Chapter 8.

This book outlines an analytics based approach to operating a dental practice. Our suggestion at Shared Practices is to use the framework to grow your practice. Using the principles discussed in this book will likely create the opportunity for your practice to grow. If you do not want to grow your...
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MinDSeT

Practice, you can use the growth you do experience to cut insurance plans and remain at your current size. However, growing your practice usually results in a better lifestyle, a higher income, and a greater net worth. When you have a profitable business that doesn't solely depend on your production, you have options. You can spend more time with your loved ones, accelerate your timeline toward financial independence, and even impact the world through causes bigger than yourself.

Now that we have established why someone would want to grow their practice, let's dive into the type of decision-making it takes to use our data-driven approach:

# What Is an Analytics Based Mindset?

Global decision-making; factoring in all aspects as opposed to only some, is a big part of an Analytics Based Mindset. The use of data allows you to get an unbiased, holistic view of a problem prior to considering potential solutions.

Prior to making a decision about your practice, you think about the implications of that decision and how it will affect the rest of your practice. I will provide an in-depth example in the next chapter; looking at the hygiene department.

A fully analytical perspective is important and is the first step in our process because it enables you to first diagnose exactly where the practice is at that moment. Then, using that information, you can determine a path to get where you want to go toward your identified vision for your practice. This vantage point allows you to look at things objectively and provides a framework for decision-making that will lead you down the right path to get what you want.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# The Four Challenging Principles of Analytics

An Analytics Based Mindset has 4 principles that, if you understand and adhere to them, enable you to make sound and effective decisions for your dental practice: These principles are also challenges for dentists as owner-operators of a business because of how embedded we are in the day-to-day delivery of high-quality dentistry while dealing with the challenges of leading a team:

# Objectivity

This one is much easier said than done. Being objective is harder than it sounds for everyone, myself included. We are humans with emotions, and those emotions cloud our judgment:

You may think a hygienist is highly contributing because he is hard-working and patients love him, but, in fact, this hygienist has the lowest restorative case acceptance, fluoride rates, and reappointment percentage of your whole team. The reason patients love this hygienist is that he doesn't bring up restorative needs or offer patients needed treatment:

The hygienist lets the dentist deliver all the costly bad news and spends the whole appointment being the best friend to the patient. Data allows us to clearly evaluate performance and avoid emotion-clouding judgment in the evaluation of our team members' performance.

When Shared Practices analyzes a dentist's practice, we use Practice by Numbers, an analytics software, to look at approximately 600 metrics that cover everything about that practice. These analytics enable the dentist to see the practice for what it is, rather than how the dentist perceives it. That's often an uncomfortable conversation, but facts don't lie. We can often make dentists aware of issues in the practice that may be impacting their case acceptance, patient retention, and overall team performance.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MinDSET

When it comes to objectivity, the first step is to look at your practice and its data without emotion. You then have to accept that the data is reality and acknowledge reality for what it is. Acceptance of reality is the first step to any improvement.

In the Practice Underwater segment of the Shared Practices podcast, which I used to record and is now run by our coaching department; the dentists interviewed very often doubt the data. They often say, "I don't think that number is accurate." I knew their data was accurate. This software program and others like it have been used to analyze thousands of offices. We know the software is telling the truth; it's tried and true. The dentists on the podcast were not the exception; however, other dentists we've worked with have felt the same way. It's because the information is new to them and hard to believe.

The first inclination when you see your data is to doubt its validity: The most important thing is to accept its validity and use it to improve your practice.

Accepting the reality of your practice using the data is necessary to make sound decisions. It's the framework for everything you do.

# Fearlessness

The decisions that it takes to grow your practice will most likely push you beyond your comfort level. If you're opening up hygiene capacity, for example, it creates a lot of fear because it goes against the staff overhead percentage that's been drilled into your head by your accountants. You may in fact have an immediate panic reaction to any openings on a hygienist's schedule as you see the highest-paid employee of your practice not completely booked. The data we demonstrate later in the book will give you confidence to overcome this fear:
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Dentists, in general, have a scarcity mindset: They don't like to take a lot of risks. In order to maximize your Practice-OlK opportunity, you are going to have to take some risks. Earlier in this chapter, I referenced an example where a dentist grew their practice by 80 percent, thus increasing their Practice-OlK balance by $800,000. That money is not free. It is earned sweat equity. Growing a business involves a lot of increased stress for short periods. Whether it be financial or management stress, a dentist's ability to handle those challenges is where their Practice-OIK balance is earned.

When you are making changes, when you are trying new things, it's human nature to fear the unknown. But if you want to grow your practice, if you want to create a lot of net worth and increase your income, you must earn it through the discomfort you will put yourself through, such as dealing with leadership challenges and trying new things in your office.

You must push through the fear by acknowledging the fear, understanding that you are doing something new or in a different way and it's making you uncomfortable. So much so that your stomach will hurt. Move forward anyway and trust the process. It's all part of growing: And, ultimately, it will be worth it:

# Intentionality

When it comes to your practice, it's important to recognize that the different parts of your practice interact with each other: Having a clear vision of what you want and where you want to go, and having all components of your practice heading in that direction allows you to maintain focus. Intentionality means aligning each process in your practice like oars in a rowboat so that everyone rows in the same direction. Each process of your
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MinDSET

phones, the way you see emergency practice is an oar: how You answer the patients, the way you do hygiene exams, etc. Each oar in your practice should be headed in the same direction. They should all be tilted toward your long-term vision and desires in your practice.

A truly analytical approach requires you to zoom out and consider the entire system of components. The way you schedule for hygiene affects many different parts of the practice: In order to be fully intentional, the impact of a change in one area of the practice needs to be fully understood. Only by fully understanding the complete implications of the practice management decisions we are faced with daily can we be fully intentional. Then, we can precisely align all of our oars to row toward our long-term practice vision. Row daily, and suddenly after a certain amount of time, we are there.

# Proactivity

Proactivity means looking in front of you instead of behind. It requires a different mindset because diverting a lot of energy to what you think you might happen. It forces you to make decisions in a new way and to look at things you ignored in the past: It requires effort because you must care not only about what will happen but, more importantly, what you intentionally want to happen: You’re guiding the future toward what you are looking for. Most dentists don’t care about focusing on the future; they’re more interested in focusing on the day-to-day items. They’re thinking about what’s on the schedule today versus 6 months from now. By the time you show up to the office, you cannot do much to improve the day you already have. If you add same-day dentistry to grow, you are mostly stealing production: tomorrow $.

A proactive approach, in contrast, is trying to improve the schedule 7 months from now instead of today: Then, 7 months from now, walk into a great day.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

The more you learn about our philosophy, the more you will understand that the way to have sustainable growth is to continually grow your future days: Then just wait for them to be present days:

The biggest benefit you get as a result of this type of decision-making is that it enables you to prepare for any unexpected difficulties. In contrast; when you're making historical decisions, you don't see potential roadblocks. You don't see the rock as you row down the river: And you can't prepare for it: It grounds your boat and prevents it from making progress.

Let me explain this more tangibly. One of the first things we do when we onboard new clients is dramatically improve their proactive retention. Our clients as a whole operate on average within the top 5 percent nationally in scheduling their patient's next visit: This leads to a busy schedule 6 to 9 months after our retention strategies are put into place. A proactive approach can help you hire in advance of the rush and have trained team members ready for the new demand.

Being proactive enables you to make month-to-month decisions by forcing you to look ahead and staying ahead of growth: For example; if you have a month coming up without a lot of treatment on the schedule, you can get ahead of it by having your treatment coordinator call patients who have unaccepted treatment and get them to commit to fill those empty appointments. At the end of the month, you'll be in a much better position than if you had left those open: It would prevent the bad month from happening in the first place as opposed to your accountant telling you about it 3 months later: The reactive way of making decisions is to look 3 months in the past: Our approach is to look 6 to 12 months forward.

The biggest emotional benefit of this type of proactive approach is the feeling of being in control. You know what's coming and what to expect: And you can make adjustments, if necessary. My life as a practice owner was much...
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MinDsET

better after my analytics epiphany in July of 2019. Things just felt easier because I knew what to expect: The wondering about the future and worrying from my turbulent first year was creating a lot of stress: Being proactive has turned that stress into an opportunity for me to confront the future head-on and make it what I want it to be.

You’re not waiting to hit the rock before you react; or panicking thinking that your boat may get stuck or even sink: You’re steering the rowboat where you want it to go.

Proactivity gives you a clear vision before you act: It allows you to stay ahead of growth: And it puts you in a position of control.

# Having Proper Expectations

One thing I find is that dentists have unrealistic expectations regarding how fast they will see results. This is why industry standard is the way it is; it’s designed to keep dentists as happy clients of their brokers, accountants, and consultants. Dentists are not going to want to wait 6 to 12 months to see a financial improvement: So we have adapted to using strategies that have small short-term financial rewards to justify the cost of industry expertise.

Let me show you how long it takes for a practice management change to hit the profit and loss statement.

When a dentist implements a change, the best-case scenario is that the change will either increase the number of patients in their office or the amount they will diagnose. Both of those will likely increase the amount of treatment to perform: We then need to get this new treatment scheduled. Once it is performed, it is then considered production: The next step is to collect the money from patients and insurance companies so that it shows up in the bank account: Once it is in the bank account, it must be interpreted by a financial professional, which can take up to 90 days: That’s a total of 3 to 6 months after we made the small change that led to an improvement.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

There is a long, delayed-gratification period from the time a dentist makes a change that leads to a good outcome and the time he receives that good outcome as a dollar amount on a profit and loss statement: Often, a dentist won't notice that a positive change has occurred until they see it on the statement. The dentist fears the practice is falling apart when expenses are high or things feel out of control despite the fact that they are actually going quite well. That's because the dentist is in the middle of success, not at the end of success, which is when you get the positive results.

There are certain changes that take 3 months to be seen. These are changes that do not need a full recare cycle to be realized. Improvements to new-patient flow, diagnosis, and case acceptance are examples of changes that have short-term financial implications.

Changes that have longer-term implications are associated with an increase in recare-patient pool size. These changes compound every 6 months because patients come back every 6 months for their regular recare. Warren Buffet calls compound interest the 8th wonder of the world. I'd call compounding recare cycles the wonder when it comes to explosive practice growth. In my opinion, growing a practice more than 30 percent requires a substantial increase to the size of the recare pool. These changes at times may take 9 to 12 months after the initial change of behavior to show up on the profit and loss statement.

It's important to stay calm and not panic. If at the 12-month point you are not seeing the increase in collections you expected, it's time to reevaluate.

# Better Decision-Making Process

Using an Analytics Based Mindset is an example of a better decision-making process. The positive results you will see 9 to 12 months from now are caused by day-to-day decisions because you are making a better-quality decision every day, and these decisions stack up on one another to create bigger outcomes.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED MINDSET

An Analytics Based Mindset lays the foundation for how to look at your dental practice: It forces you to be more aware of what’s going on in your practice and gives you a sense of ease and control instead of feeling anxious about bad things that have happened or will happen. You’re looking forward, knowing where you are going—and you believe in your goals.

You are rowing the boat with all your oars pointed in the same direction, certain you can navigate around any rocks you may encounter and that you will reach your destination:

# Takeaways

1. Remember the 4 principles (objective, fearless, intentional, and proactive) when making good decisions on a daily basis.
2. It takes time for a good decision to pay off, typically 3 to 12 months for the dollars you’ve earned to land in your personal bank account.
3. Growth occurs through compounding good decisions on a day-to-day basis.
4. An Analytics Based Mindset gives you an overall sense of control and a feeling of ease when guiding your practice.

Now that we’ve looked at differences between the dental industry standards and an Analytics Based Mindset—and how using an Analytics Based Mindset can significantly improve your practice and ultimately your quality of life—we’re ready to discuss Analytics Based Practice Management.
---
# CHAPTER 3

# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

nepiphany can change everything: As I mentioned earlier; when I bought my practice, one of the sellers stayed on with me as an associate dentist: I thought this would make the transition to running a private practice easier: Despite the help; maintaining the performance of the 30-year-old 2-dentist established practice was causing me a lot of stress and anxiety:

When my practice tanked in February of 2019, my stress level went through the roof. I had taken on too many expenses relative to what we were producing and collecting, which left no room for me to make money: I worked tirelessly with my coach to determine the best course of action. Each month, I tried 1 or 2 different approaches, nothing seemed to move the needle yet.

In July 2019, prior to a speaking engagement at my former dental school, I was feeling extremely frustrated, causing me to ask myself while sitting in my office: What are we doing wrong? Why is this not working?

For whatever reason, I started thinking about when I had evaluated dental practices for sale while in dental school. They all shared something in common: hygiene revenue compared to total office revenue was between 20 and 30 percent: When screening a practice, this percentage is one of the things that is

54
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

looked at to determine how much opportunity exists. I decided to look at my hygiene revenue in order to determine what level of revenue my practice should be doing thinking that if I could figure it out, then I could understand what we were doing wrong: I looked through my prior months, and on average, my practice obtained around 27 percent of its revenue from hygiene:

Previous month's hygiene review: $29,700

I divided my hygiene revenue by 27 percent:

$29,700 + 27 percent = $110,000

When I did this calculation, I was shocked to see that on the other end of the calculation was the exact amount of collections my office had that month:

That's when I had an epiphany:

For each dollar my practice earned in hygiene, it, on average, will lead to an additional $2.70 in dentist production: It must do that in order for the 27 percent hygiene ratio to work out: So $1 earned in hygiene leads to an extra $2.70 for a total of $3.70 of practice revenue per $1 of hygiene revenue. Otherwise the practice's hygiene ratio could not remain at 27 percent:

It was then that I realized my practice wasn't doing anything wrong. We simply did not have enough patients.

No amount of team training would add the number of patients my practice needed. I had been spending all of my time implementing checklists, becoming more productive in hygiene, and working on how we presented treatment. None of these things increased the number of patients coming through hygiene each day, which was the main problem my practice was facing, creating additional expenses. We had enough patients to sustainably produce and collect the amounts that we needed to support the dentists.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

But once I made changes and expenses increased, the practice became unsustainable. Again, the issue wasn't that we were doing anything wrong as a team. It was that the practice didn't have enough patients. The growth was not sustainable and that had tricked me. The practice had enough patients to fully occupy 1.2 dentists. We had the full staff and makeup of a 2-dentist office doing $2 million per year:

Everything had suddenly become clear: And I immediately knew what needed to do. Because for the first time, I saw the difference between where my practice was and where it needed to go. My practice had the right number of operatories, dentists, hygienists, and front-desk team members to support 2,200 to 2,500 patients. At the time we had 1,800 patients. I didn't need to make any other changes to my practice, other than to ensure we had the correct number of hygiene patients for the number of dentists.

That's when I began focusing on my hygiene department: I knew that if I could grow the amount of hygiene revenue by increasing the number of hygiene patients, a proportional and predictable amount of practice growth would occur as a result. In my practice, for every dollar of hygiene revenue I added, it would lead to a total increase of my office's revenue by $3.70. And it worked. Nine months after this epiphany, my practice had $220,000 in adjusted production on the schedule to produce in March of 2020. Double what we had on the schedule in July of 2019. Unfortunately for me, March of 2020 was not a month we got to finish:

Over the period of the COVID-19 closure, we worked hard as a team at Shared Practices to release a coaching product that could implement and test our philosophies in practices. To date, at the end of 2022, we have worked with over 100 offices. Our clients have averaged a 39 percent increase in revenue.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

collections in our first full year implementing our philosophy and a 37 percent increase in collections during our second full year using analytics-supported, hygiene-driven growth:

Since this epiphany, we learned that the easiest way to grow your practice is to grow the number of patients on a daily basis and then ensure they keep coming back.

# The Dental 3-Pointer

After my epiphany, I learned an important equation. It is very much the foundation of Analytics Based Practice Management:

Production = Production per Patient x Number of Patients

What this equation ultimately means is that there are 2 ways to grow a dental practice:

- You can improve your operations to increase the amount you make per patient (efficiency).
- Or you can make a change to increase the amount of patients in your practice (volume).

Any change or modification to your practice is either improving your efficiency or increasing your patient base size.

Bringing this back to my epiphany: I had spent the past 12 months improving all of my operations by working on my production per patient. However, I completely ignored the fact that I did not have enough patients for the number of team members, operatories, and dentists in my practice:

Once I became aware of my problem which was needing additional hygiene patients, I began looking through industry standards for the best way to do so. This is where I began to encounter the Dental 2-Point shot:
---
# DENTAL MonEyBALL

According to the current dental industry standard, hygiene is looked at as a profit center for the practice. This view came from the dental accountant.

The commonly agreed-upon best strategy for hygiene is to minimize openings and increase hygiene productivity through adjunctive services. This could include periodontal therapy, fluoride, or sealants.

Some practice management companies even suggest overbooking hygiene, similar to an airline overbooking a flight; to mitigate the risk of cancellations. The industry standard sends a pretty clear message. Keep hygiene profitable by minimizing the amount of time the practice's most expensive hourly employee, the hygienist, is sitting around with nothing to do.

My issue with the industry standard solution was that it did nothing to address my problem, which was needing more patients. I needed to use a hygiene strategy that increased the number of patients in my practice, because that was my unique problem. I needed to point my practice toward the direction I wanted my practice to go, which included growing the number of patients we had. All of the industry standard philosophies were focused on making my hygiene department more profitable by minimizing openings and converting more adjunctive services. Which, in the case of periodontal therapy, would further fill up the hygiene schedule and take away openings from new patients. That would be working against what I was trying to accomplish.

When Daryl Morey changed basketball, he made a key observation. He realized that no one accounted for the fact that 3-pointers are worth 50 percent more points than 2-pointers. Even if 3-pointers are made less frequently than 2-pointers, they could still be worth more points on average over a large volume of attempts. He figured this out by assessing a value to each attempt; whether or not it went in did not matter: He measured the expected points per attempt and learned that 3-pointers on average are worth more points per shot attempt even though they are made less frequently:

58
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

The Dental 3-Pointer is a similar spin on the industry standard view of a dental hygienist: The Dental 2-Point shot is the industry standard approach in hygiene to take the responsible, safe; known outcome. Make sure there are no openings so that hygiene can become profitable. The outcome of that strategy is a safe and conservative approach to hygiene that does not take much risk and ensures hygiene is profitable.

Rather than thinking about hygiene as a profit center, could hygiene be used in a way that would increase the number of patients in my practice? Because think about it: I had just learned that for each $1 of hygiene revenue, I get a total of $3.70 in practice revenue. I was more interested in getting more hygiene revenue, knowing additional practice revenue would follow as a natural consequence. I was not as worried about hygiene being profitable. I wanted the $3.70 of practice revenue more than I wanted the $1 of hygiene revenue to be profitable.

The Dental 3-Pointer starts by questioning the economic value of a hygiene opening: We know there is a financial risk required to open the hygiene schedule; our industry standard works so hard to avoid this. But what value is there in leaving it open and risking the chance it gets filled with an extra patient? On top of all the other patients we are already going to be seeing that day:

This is very similar to the way Daryl Morey thought about the 3-pointer in basketball. He wanted to numerically be able to compare the value of shooting a 2-point shot and a 3-point shot. He was able to do that by figuring out the expected points for each attempt: Shooting the Dental 3-Pointer starts by understanding the true total practice value of a hygiene visit.

In order to look at a hygiene appointment properly, we must, for the first time, apply an Analytics Based Mindset: We must get a global view of all of the areas where a hygiene appointment interacts with different parts of the practice: At Shared Practices, we created a practice flowchart that illustrates.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

All the ways the various components of the dental practice interact with each other. We will be breaking down the various components of the chart throughout the rest of this book.

Let’s take a look at what happens analytically when an extra hygiene opening is filled. I'll include the dollar amounts for my practice that I figured out during my epiphany: This was the breakdown of the total value of a recare visit:

1. A patient fills an opening. In filling that opening, hygiene production is added ($165/hour).
2. The dentist performs an exam, which provides a small fee as well ($30/visit).
3. The dentist will also diagnose, and a percentage of those diagnoses will be accepted and scheduled (82% of treatment scheduled per exam).

That is a grand total of $418 in total revenue added to the practice if an existing patient filled an opening created through a different hygiene strategy, which is in addition to the production my practice was already doing: You will find out in the Revenue Retention chapter that additional production added is highly profitable.

To bring this all together; earlier I described the $1 of hygiene revenue leading to $3.70 of total practice revenue to maintain the practice's stable hygiene percentage. Now looking at an average recare visit, you will see that $165 of hygiene revenue leads to $418 of practice revenue on average: That is a lot of upside, similar to what Daryl Morey saw when he looked at the benefits of making 3-pointers.

What is the risk the practice takes on to create these hygiene openings? It's the total cost of creating that opening, the hourly wage of an additional.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

hygienist: In my practice, including taxes, I was paying around $45 per hour in total hygiene compensation. Meaning my total cost per opening created around $45. If an existing patient filled the opening, the practice would get on average $418 of total practice revenue. I was shocked to see that an existing patient filling an opening provided an almost 10x return on investment.

By limiting openings, the Dental 2-Point shot prevents practice owners from earning a potential 10x return on investment. Wow. The dental industry standard got this one wrong: This false industry standard belief is costing a lot of practice owners a lot of growth.

# Here’s the math showing how this works:

|Existing Patient Visit:|60 minutes|
|---|---|
|Total Cost to Create Additional Opening:|$45/opening|
|Total revenue added to the practice if filled with an existing patient:| |
|$165 of hygiene production| |
|$30 of dentist production for the exam| |
|$223 in scheduled dentist production per exam on average| |
|Existing Patient Total Revenue Added if an opening is filled with an existing patient:|$418|
|Total return on investment if an opening is filled with an existing patient:|9.2x|

The math for a new patient equaled between $750 to $900 in any given month with the value of new patients fluctuating more than existing patients. I’ll show what the math looks like for an average new-patient-visit value:

# New-Patient Visit:

90 minutes
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Total Cost to Create Additional Opening: $62.50/opening (90-minute visit)

$247 of hygiene production

$45 of dentist production for the exam

$458--$608 in scheduled dentist production per exam on average

$750-$900 of total revenue if an opening is filled with a new patient

Total return on investment if an opening is filled with a new patient: 12-14x (this excludes any costs associated with new-patient acquisition)

Let me outline what this really means. For this section, imagine your dental practice is a casino. I know that might sound abrasive, but stick with me. There is this game you can play as the owner; the house. You can risk opening the hygiene schedule. If, by chance, it fills with an existing patient, you get 9x your original investment. If, by chance, it fills with a new patient; you get 12-16x your original investment. Would you choose to participate in this form of strategic risk as a practice owner?

# Application of Dental Moneyball in a Nutshell

This is the data to find the advantageous things a dental practice should be doing to get the best possible outcome. Then doing those "risky things" to turn the tables in your favor:

When I first began experimenting with this philosophy, there would be entire days where I had a hygienist waiting to see if people would book. We have since learned the appropriate ways to expand the hygiene schedule: Now, we are much more methodical about how we strategically open the hygiene schedule. Usually, we are happy when 50 to 67 percent of our newly created openings are filled.

I quickly learned that creating openings in my hygiene schedule offers so many benefits. It allowed us the opportunity to reactivate overdue patients. It made it easier for patients to schedule hygiene appointments (they were more likely to book appointments when we had more available). We began getting new
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

Patients who were booking online and who claimed they had selected our office because we had an available opening that day: New patients were able to be seen faster; and as a consequence, we saw more new patients. Every time we implement this philosophy in dental practices, clients are amazed at how openings just seem to get filled.

We learned that while new patients are more valuable, they are less predictable. Existing patients are more valuable than you might realize. They bring a sizable economic impact to the practice. The easy way of thinking about it is that existing patients are the stability in your practice: They get your revenue past your expenses each and every month. The new patients are profitable, only because you have a backbone of existing patients who you have built your practice on. There is also usually a cost to acquiring new patients, which can sometimes make new patients less profitable.

I realized the Dental 3-pointer was adding extra hygiene patients to your schedule, then keeping them forever:

These were the results I got in my practice:

$750-900 of extra revenue per new patient added.

We turned 80 percent of these new patients into existing patients, who returned to our practice 6 months later:

When they returned, the patients became one of our many existing patients. Each existing patient-hygiene visit is worth, on average, $418 of predictable recurring revenue.

In short; we call the Dental 3-Pointer ROF. Retain, open, fill. We will walk through how to execute this strategy in our case studies in Chapter 9.

63
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

Nine months after I figured out the Dental 3-Pointer, I doubled the size of my practice. From stuck at $110,000 per month to producing $220,000 if COVID-19 had not happened. We've since learned so much about what we now call Strategic Hygiene Openings. We will discuss the rest of what you need to know in Part 2, during the Patient Retention chapter:

# A Predictable System

Most dentists think there is something wrong with their practice that needs to be fixed. That a different checklist or way of doing things will change the outcome. But it doesn't work. A dental practice is a system that contains many different levers and components. When you look at the system on a numerical basis, there's a process that can be measured. The measurable process enables you to be in control; you can be intentional about what you do at every part of the patient experience. And that leads to improving, changing, and growing a practice:

People are so confused when it comes to practice growth: Dentists often chase their tails by buying expensive equipment, taking courses to learn more procedures, and implementing many other failed efforts trying to grow their practices. Dentists often spend 6 figures on new equipment and other purchases in an attempt to grow their practices. There is an entire industry catered toward selling dentists marginal improvement in their practices.

The largest return on investment you can have for growing your practice is improving how it operates. Little tweaks add up over time to create big outcomes. Starting with a long-term sense of direction, decisions need to be made with complete intentionality: Whatever bottlenecks are in your practice's way, you will get the highest return on improving those parts of the practice.

But in order to make changes, you must acknowledge that your practice is behaving exactly as you expect it to behave. There's nothing to be fixed. If you want to grow, you can tweak and modify what you do to achieve those changes.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

results, because your practice is a predictable system with inputs and outputs.

# How a Practice Flows

Understanding a practice flowchart is important because it uncomplicates the process of owning a dental practice: I'll introduce you to the different aspects of the flowchart and how they work together: We will dive into each of these in more depth in subsequent chapters.

|New Patient|Existing Patient|
|---|---|
|Patient Retention|Patient Flow|
|Hygiene Production|Diagnosis|
|Case Acceptance|Doctor Production|
|Treatment Retention|Production|
|Collections|Revenue Retention|
|Profitability| |

# Patient Retention

The top third of the flowchart shows the ways in which patients enter a dental practice. There are 2 types of patients: new patients who have never been to the office and existing patients who return for additional visits.

One of the most important objectives of patient flow is the arrow from patient flow to existing patients. That is your retention. You have patients coming into your practice, and a big part of your strategy should be to keep.
---
# DENTALMONEYBALL

them coming back so that over time you build up the number of patients coming into your practice (returning patients plus new patients). Well discuss patient retention in great detail in the next chapter.

# Hygiene Visit Value

Once a patient comes into your practice, you have 2 opportunities to generate revenue on that visit:

1. Hygiene Production: When a patient comes in for their cleaning, they see a hygienist: If the patient has periodontal disease or other issues that would necessitate additional hygiene treatment, such as fluoride varnish, there’s an opportunity to grow your practice production through adjunctive hygiene services. This production is very profitable, even though it may not lead to as much extra production as other changes.
2. Scheduled Treatment: One of the first levers you can pull when growing your practice is to have a team-led treatment acceptance process versus a dentist-led treatment acceptance process. Co-diagnosis is the process of the team showing patients photos and radiographs of their teeth to help them own the problem before you present the solution: While many in the industry have talked about co-diagnosis, the key to sustainable, predictable treatment acceptance is to empower your hygienists and assistants to drive the co-diagnosis process. By the time you walk into the room, you want the patient saying, “Doctor; Kathleen [your hygienist] showed me that I have a cracked, stained molar: I want it fixed before it splits in half, and we have to pull it.” The hygienist spends much more time with the patient during a cleaning than the dentist does. Because of this, patients often have a better relationship with the hygienist and sometimes trust their opinion more than the dentist. Empower your hygienist to share what they see, what the possible treatment options are, and what will likely happen if the...
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

patient delays treatment: This ultimately leads to a measurable increase in both the amount of treatment discussed with patients and ultimately the amount of treatment scheduled.

When we look at a practice using an Analytics Based Mindset, we are weighing the pros and cons as opposed to focusing on one or the other: Usually, we see the largest initial returns in improving case acceptance first. If a practice is efficient in their case-acceptance process, we will focus on productivity in hygiene. Trying to do both at the same time often means not doing either well: We prefer to focus on one improvement per department (hygiene, admin, assistants) at a time:

# Dentist Production

Once the dentist has diagnosed issues and presented treatment options to patients, a certain number of those patients will accept treatment, and they will show up on the dentist's schedule. The key from that point on is to ensure they don't cancel their appointment: Getting them in the dentist's chair is how the dentist will produce.

Some levers to pull here are in the scheduling efficiency process. The diagnosis and case-acceptance process get us treatment to do. How much of that treatment we perform in any given month is based on how fast we can get the treatment done.

This is a bigger lever than some might think. I became very productive per hour clinically in my career when it was necessary: However, I hated being busy clinically: I did not like the flow of running around all day: I preferred to have time to build the practice around me at a slower pace and during a period of associate turnover; I had to check exams for 4 hygienists. I was forced to grow because I had to produce enough dentistry to support the entire practice: I ended up being able to produce over $800/hour of dentist production: I will share more about increasing your clinical productivity in the Treatment Retention chapter:
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# Total Production

A practice's total production is the addition of all the services performed by all the clinical providers in the practice. For the purposes of this book and our philosophy, I ignore revenue from non-patient-care services like electric toothbrush sales.

# Collections

The services the dentist and hygienist have performed on a patient now go to collections, which is the practice's accounts receivable. The money either needs to come from a patient or an insurance company: It involves sending claims to insurance companies and statements to patients to collect what you are owed. Being paid by patients at the time of service or when they are in the office can greatly help your collections process. It's important to ensure you are paid because, at the end of the day, collections are what we use to pay our expenses. Although collections are what pays the bills, you cannot collect what you did not produce.

Dentists often make the mistake of having collections policies that are too strict and get in the way of production. The key with collections is to follow an agreed-upon process. The results from the process are evaluated on a semiregular basis. To accelerate production, you can include patient financing that may bring down barriers to certain treatment options.

# Profitability

The last aspect of the flowchart is profitability: Your profitability equals your collections minus expenses. In the dental business, expenses are typically the same from month to month. This is the biggest issue I have with the overhead percentage mindset. Your expenses are roughly the same each month, so why do I care about the percentage? When practice collections surpass practice expenses, the dentist gets the rest as their take-home pay. Take-home pay fluctuates based on revenue; since the expenses are mostly the same.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

fixed every month: I see certain areas where the percentage is useful, like variable costs (supplies, lab bills, associate pay).

Increasing profitability is simple: increase your revenue while keeping your expenses similar or slightly elevated. This is the mindset that should be used when looking at profit and loss statements. How can I increase my revenue for the lowest possible investment?

That attitude and mindset will lead to growth-related changes that will, in turn, increase your take-home pay.

In simple terms, your revenue fluctuates, your expenses are mostly fixed, and you make the difference. In my opinion, the obsession with overhead percentages as a guiding metric has led to many underperforming dental practices. Too much focus is placed on your expenses and not enough focus is on how to improve production.

Using the industry standard's logic, if there is a decision that increases your revenue, increases your take-home pay, and increases your staff overhead percentage, it should not be done if the staff overhead percentage will go above 30 percent: In that case, the number would be red on your accounting report when comparing your practice to other dental practices and would be classified as an incorrect decision. Your accountant will tell you that you are overstaffed. When in fact; that may be exactly what your practice needs.

Dentists should be making decisions based on what will increase their take-home pay: If an extra clinical team member allows you to produce more, it will likely increase your take-home pay.

Your day-to-day life will also flow easier: Increased income and a better experience at the office somehow take a backseat to our desire to keep staff overhead below 30 percent: This is another industry-standard practice that needs to bite the dust.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

The Practice Components Are Connected

As you can see, a dental practice has many different components. These components are similar to the oars of a rowboat. If aligned properly, the oars of your practice can move it in whatever direction you'd like it to go.

The oars are your existing patient process, patient flow strategy, hygiene production strategy, diagnosis strategy, case-acceptance strategy, dentist production strategy, and collections strategies. At the moment, all of these are oars rowing your practice in an unknown direction.

The first step in our process is evaluating the performance of the different components of your practice. This is where the reliance on data and objectivity is so crucial. It allows us to see what needs to be done and what things the practice already does well.

When it comes to the dental practice, dentists and industry experts often only look at a piece of the picture and not the whole picture. Some dental consultants suggest doing things like giving every patient a warm, scented towel, thinking it will improve customer service, increase retention, and grow their practice.

But what if that isn't their problem? What if the office is doing an adequate job at retaining patients?

What if their actual problem is that they are diagnosing a lot but aren't converting those cases?

The warm, scented towels will do nothing to change their practice. In fact, it would take time and money away from growing their practice. Single-use scented towels and a warmer must be purchased. Someone must take time to prepare the towels, time they could be using for a more productive task. Most importantly, it removes focus from other areas of the practice that are more important for the particular office.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

To make effective management decisions, it's important to understand how each change in process or protocol will affect outcomes, based on the flowchart of how the parts of your practice interact with each other. Then, it is important to understand what is holding back a specific practice from getting to where the owner wants to go.

Only after those 2 things have been fully understood can we confidently make a change in our behavior as a team. We must fully understand the effects (both intended and unintended), then choose intentionally: That is how analytics based decisions are made in a dental practice. It is the compounding of those thorough decisions on a regular basis, for a long period of time, that creates the biggest outcomes.

# Trickle-Down Effect

The practice flowchart flows from the top down: Every change that occurs at one point on the flowchart impacts everything below it on the diagram. When it comes to your dental practice, flow has the largest trickle-down effect:

Imagine your practice is like a waterfall flowing through an intricate system consisting of inputs and outputs. As the water falls from the top of the waterfall, it touches all the components on its way down to the ground. The greater the water flow, the greater the impact it has on everything in its path.

Therefore, a change to flow increases the following:

- patient Hygiene production
- Diagnosis
- Scheduled treatment
- Total office production
- Collections
- Total take-home pay
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Before I had my epiphany, my practice was failing because I didn't focus on the water at the top of the waterfall, the patient flow: The number of dentists and staff members was double what I needed for the number of patients coming into the office every day.

So, despite performing in all the components of my practice (hygiene, diagnosis, dentist production, etc.), the results weren't there: I had based my practice's needs on some hot months I had early on and thought it was a bigger practice than it actually was.

This confusion I experienced is why we created the practice avatars we will discuss in Chapter 7. We created avatars to prevent dentists from not knowing what type of practice they have. I spent my first year in ownership completely unaware of the fact that I had a Productive Solo office, with the staff of a group practice.

Once my strategy shifted and I increased patient flow because I understood the proportional impact of every patient who came into the office, the practice became profitable. When you double the size of your hygiene base, you double the size of the practice.

If you want rapid and explosive growth, it's most easily accomplished by increasing the number of patients in relation to whatever proportion you would like to grow. If you want to grow your practice by 50 percent, increase the number of patients walking into your office every day by 50 percent.

If you're only looking to grow your practice by 30 percent or less, you don't need to focus on patient flow. Instead, you can focus on improving production per patient. Keep in mind, however, the amount per patient that you are able to produce is limited, which will also limit your income. You can only get so many patients to say yes to treatment. It's much easier to increase the number of patients starting with hygiene. It makes the growth process much easier, especially if you're looking to grow more than 30 percent.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

When you take an analytics based approach to practice management looking at all system inputs and outputs and understanding that increased flow will yield the highest return on investment because it trickles all patient the way down from the top to the bottom--You are setting your practice up for growth and success.

A growth-based philosophy requires a growth-based dentist who is willing to look at a practice's inputs and outputs and tune it to the wanted results. A lot of dentists who come to Shared Practices want higher net worth, provides a higher income, and enables for additional staff so that the dentist can make more and work less.

Having a larger practice and a greater number of staff members, including an office manager, takes the burden off you and frees you up to do what you really want to do. You don't have to spend as much of your time on a daily basis paying bills, managing staff if they're late, hiring, and firing, etc. All the things you had to do when your practice was smaller are now being handled by someone else.

# Work-Life Harmony

Outside of the financial benefits, Analytics Based Practice Management creates work-life harmony. This is the largest benefit I and many of our clients have received from our philosophy: When business owners don't understand how their business is functioning it leads to anxiety, which then leads to dentists making changes they think will improve their practice, although they don't really understand how. But those changes don't necessarily work and that leads to greater stress.

Analytics Based Practice Management enables you to achieve clarity. To know that if you improve or touch on a part of your practice, it will have a specific effect: Having clarity leads to a greater sense of control and less.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Uncertainty: There's an ease in knowing what is happening: That's why there is value in having clarity about the parts of your practice that matter most: Analytics Based Practice Management also helps you know what to focus on and what to ignore. So, if you have clarity regarding your practice and your retention is fine, you will know when you read a post on Facebook about using scented towels that using towels is a waste of time and you don't need to focus on them.

Focus on what actually matters that will make your practice more effective, such as intentionally improving retention or increasing patient flow.

When you grow your practice using Analytics Based Practice Management; you can enjoy practice ownership more: You can free up your time by not worrying about the day-to-day aspects of running your practice: You will feel more mentally free to do what excites you about dentistry, you will feel more relaxed, and you can focus on what you would like, whether that's more clinical dentistry or taking time off from the office.

And when you're happier at work, that spills over into your home life and vice versa. You can't separate the two. When things are going well in the office, things go better at home. When things go well at home, they go better at the office.

Having a bigger practice with analytics based protocols that are team-led enables you to better balance the harmony because the entire operation is no longer solely dependent on you: You no longer have to carry the entire load yourself. If you have multiple dentists at the office, you no longer have to pay all the expenses (rent, employees, advertising, loan payment, supplies) with your own two hands.

And that leads to a more sustainable career long term with the many benefits we just discussed.
---
# ANALYTICS BASED PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

# Takeaways

1. Your practice is performing exactly as its supposed to.
2. Shoot the Dental 3-Pointer: Retain. Open: Fill. ROF as we call it: predictable process for the way the different components of your practice work together: It's extremely important to understand the impact of every change you are trying to make in your practice by understanding how it affects the different processes laid out in the flowchart.
3. There is a
4. Changes at the top of the flowchart trickle down: Changes to patient flow therefore have the largest impact.
5. When you run your practice using an Analytics Based Practice Management philosophy, you give yourself freedom. You have increased clarity, ease, and focus, and that impacts your work-life harmony.

When you understand that your practice is a predictable system of inputs and outputs, it enables you to make informed decisions to grow your practice based on facts instead of guesswork or emotion. In the next 3 chapters, we will look at the parts of the flowchart (patient retention, treatment retention, and revenue retention) in action:
---
NO_CONTENT_HERE
---
# PART II

# PRACTICE

# FLOWCHARTS AND STRATEGIES

77
---
# CHAPTER 4

# PATIENT RETENTION

When I first gave the following lecture at our 2-day course, Analytics Based Practice Management; I had to give everyone a heads-up heading into this section: Part 2 of this book is dense. This is where we give you the meat and potatoes of our practice management philosophy:

The general goal for the first part of this book, which you just read, was to give you the general mindset required to understand a practice in a fully analytical way. If we did our job, you’d agree with us on the following statements:

- There are serious holes in the current dental industry standard way of running a dental practice.
- A holistic, global, long-term perspective is the best way to operate a dental practice.

|New Patient|Existing Patient|
|---|---|
|Patient Retention|Patient Flow|
|78|78|
---
# PATIENT RETENTION

Adopting this new framework allows us to customize an approach unique to each practice and each practice owner:

- Each practice owner has unique goals.
- Each practice has unique bottlenecks.

A data-driven approach provides clarity and guidance, which creates ease and improves the owner's quality of life.

A Dental 3-Pointer is available. Creating hygiene openings is like shooting 3-pointers. Filling them is like making 3-pointers that are worth more points. This can lead to a lot of good outcomes for dental practices:

- In my practice, there was $3.70 of total revenue for each $1 of added hygiene revenue.
- More existing patients provide practices with financial stability and long-term growth.
- Hygiene openings create additional opportunities for new patients.

In short, Retain. Open. Fill.

Transitioning into Part 2, we are now going to discuss our current Shared Practices data-driven beliefs regarding the rest of a dental practice's components. We will work through each component on the dental practice flowchart: In the interest of creating an engaging book, we won’t go into the in-depth math we used to arrive at every one of our conclusions. The information is already very dense:

# How My Epiphany Changed Everything

Let’s bring things back to where we left off regarding my epiphany: I had just spent the last 6 months changing 10 to 12 things about how my practice operated.

79
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

But nothing worked. None of these changes grew my practice significantly creating more work from the patients I already had because I was I wasn’t focusing on improving patient flow, the upper part of the funnel, which was my true bottleneck.

Instead, I was focusing on the middle of the practice flowchart (which we will discuss in the next chapter: Treatment Retention), trying to improve hygiene productivity, diagnosis, case acceptance, and dentist production. As a business owner, I was very embarrassed, and my self-esteem and confidence were at an all-time low. Here I was, a new dentist with a podcast that provided information about practice management, and I was running a large and very unprofitable operation. In addition, calls with my accountant made me nervous because he’d tell me what I already knew—that my practice was unprofitable.

Despite my best efforts, I couldn't change the narrative: I was confused, frustrated, and disheartened each month when I saw that my practice collections were at the same level as the previous month. All that work and nothing had improved growth. Until I had my epiphany and focused on patient flow.

I can't express to you how big of a difference it made to know what would actually solve my problem: Once I knew the solution, I focused all my time and effort on solving the true problem I had.

We've since learned that growth in patient flow is the most valuable type of growth you can have because, as we discussed previously, that one person you get into your practice provides value for as long as you retain them as a patient.
---
# PATiENT ReTention

We call this approach shooting the Dental 3-Pointer: I outlined the math and philosophy behind our hygiene-driven growth strategy. I will now break down the entire patient-flow component of the dental practice in more depth:

Let me break down patient flow using a helpful visual, the leaky bucket:

# The Leaky Bucket

The leaky bucket contains 3 components: the amount of water in the bucket; the amount of water being added, and the amount of water leaking out:

These 3 factors combined determine how much water is in the bucket at any given time.

|New Patients|Existing Patients|Patient Attrition Rate|
|---|---|---|
|81|81|81|
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

If you think of the leaky bucket as your dental practice: the amount of water in the bucket is your existing patients, those who come back to your practice every 6 months for cleanings; the amount of water added to your bucket is new-patient flow; and leaking out is your patient attrition rate, how many people leave your practice.

When you have a big leak in the bucket, it becomes impossible to fill it; even if adding new patients. You hemorrhage water and the loss of patient flow leads to minimal returns in your effort to grow the number of patients in your practice. Or the total amount of water in your bucket at any given time.

To drive this point home, I want to discuss the practice I purchased as it relates to the leaky-bucket analogy: When I bought my practice, there were approximately 1,900 active patients. This represents the amount of water in the bucket.

I found out the practice was losing around 40 existing patients per month: These patients simply fell out of the habit of going to the dentist: This was how big the leak was. Forty patients a month were leaking out of the patient base by falling out of the recare cycle.

The practice was adding approximately 18 new patients a month. This was the amount of water being added to the bucket.

If you do the simple math, the practice was net losing on average 22 patients a month, which means every month, there was a little less water in the bucket: Over time, that leads to large amounts of water missing from the leaking bucket.

Later in this chapter, we will do a simulation and show that many practices in the US are losing patients each month.
---
# PATIENT Retention

# The Importance of Retention

From an industry standard perspective, the importance of retention is commonly misunderstood: In order to benefit from the risks of shooting the Dental 3-Pointer; You must first have very sound retention. Retention is the first step to shooting the Dental 3-Pointer: Extra patients who you cannot keep are not going to help your practice 6 months from now.

I can't count how many times I've seen dentists question the value of their recare pool. The first important thing to understand is that recare patients are not all created equal. A recare patient who comes to your practice two times a year is close to twice as valuable as the patient who only comes in once. Therefore, a big part of your success is getting as many of your patients as possible to come in as frequently as you can.

Notice how in this book I keep saying to double the number of patients who come into your practice daily: A big part of that can come from existing patients who may only visit your practice once a year at the moment. Getting as many patients as possible to visit twice can have a large effect financially. The key to pulling this off is to proactively book their next appointment when they are at your office. You will see that retaining patients proactively is much more effective than attempting to do it reactively.

There are ways to retain a patient: proactive and reactive. Proactive involves setting up a patient’s next visit while physically in your office. If you make sure that every patient has their next visit scheduled before they leave your office, you know they will either come back for their next visit or call to reschedule. The national average for proactive retention is 68 percent; so for every 3 patients who walk into a dental practice, 2 will schedule another visit. The third patient, the one who doesn't schedule, shifts from a high chance of retention to a low chance of retention simply because they didn't.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

They have a 10 percent chance of coming back in on time if they leave without scheduling that next visit: The importance of proactive retention is hard to overstate. You can retain over 90 percent of your patients proactively and ensure they either come again or call to cancel. It is the most effective means of retention a dental practice has and is much more effective than reactively retaining patients.

Later in this chapter; you will see the compounding impact of improving your proactive retention: Reactive is when a patient leaves your office without their next scheduled visit. This is the least effective way to retain patients because people generally don't think about the dentist between their 6-month visits. In order to retain these patients, you must contact them to schedule another visit. Retaining patients reactively drops your retention rate from 90 to between 5 and 25 percent, meaning you only have at best a 25 percent chance of each patient coming back for another visit.

Most dentists in the United States are losing patients, the exact opposite of growing their practices. When people buy a practice, they are so stressed about keeping patients. New practice owners often tiptoe around their staff and patients in an effort to keep their patients. The numbers say practices lose way more patients by neglecting to reappoint than they do by upsetting patients. There is no need to worry about losing patients due to honest diagnosis, office policies, or staff turnover.

When you retain your patients effectively with repeatable retention strategies, you can afford to lose the ones who are not culture fits. I've certainly upset a handful of patients in my career: These patients left my office knowing that when I bought my practice, the practice was losing 40 patients a month. I do not think I could have possibly upset that many people each month: Knowing this gave me confidence to run the office in the best way possible, trusting that the patient base would organically grow over time. I wish more dentists would trust their retention protocols and not tolerate unacceptable behavior from patients or staff.
---
# Patient RETENTION

Retention compounds over time. When you retain patients, your patient base can balloon because you’re plugging the holes in your bucket and enabling the amount of water to increase and grow rapidly. When you’re losing patients, it can quickly eat away at the stable production your practice has on the books.

To illustrate the compounding recare-cycles concept, I want to compare the retention performances of 3 kinds of practices. We will look at each over a 24-month period. You will see what full calendar years of 4 recare cycles looks like, adding extra patients. In this example, we are not opening the schedule or shooting the Dental Pointer. I think it is important to illustrate just how impactful improvements in retention can truly be. It's the foundation of a growing practice.

# Here are the 3 practices:

1. A Shared Practices office
2. A well-run industry standard office
3. The average US practice

# Practice 1: A Shared Practices Office

The first practice is an office that has adopted our philosophy which is to focus a lot of effort on the few things that really move the needle. Retention is a big one. I mentioned this earlier; but the clients who work with us average in the top 5 percent nationally overall when it comes to retention. We accomplish this by focusing on proactive retention early in the process, then putting some reactive retention protocols in place later on.

It is not uncommon for us to have a client with 94 percent proactive retention and 25 percent reactive retention. So for this example, I will use those typical numbers we strive to achieve:

|Proactive retention:|94 percent|
|---|---|
|Reactive retention:|25 percent|
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# Practice 2: A Well-Run Industry Standard Office

This practice is the average of the top 30 percent of offices in the US. These offices use performance-based analytics software. Because they use the software, I can see their data. The average revenue in these practices is $1 million a year; as opposed to the national average of $675,000. These offices represent the top 30 percent of practices in the US. I think it is fair to call this the industry standard office: These offices track and use analytics to improve performance using the industry's best practices.

|Proactive retention:|82 percent|
|---|---|
|Reactive retention:|10 percent|

# Practice 3: Average US Practice

I have a lot of negative things to say about this type of practice: According to the American Dental Association, the average practice in the US collects $675,000 per year: This means half of the practices in the US collect less than $675,000 per year: I find this number to be one of the largest issues facing our industry: If we could elevate this number, you likely would not see the consolidation happening as fast as it is. Nonetheless, here are the retention numbers in the average dental practice:

|Proactive retention:|68 percent|
|---|---|
|Reactive retention:|5 percent|

# The Simulation

Let's look at each of these practices over 24 months. For a true apples-to-apples comparison, each practice will start the simulation with the same number of patients and the same new-patient flow: The only difference is how well they retain patients.

Each practice starts with 200 patients per month in the hygiene program. Each practice will also add 20 new patients per month: To make things fair,
---
# PATIENT Retention

The Shared Practices office won't use the Dental 3-Pointer. There will be no openings created or filling of those openings. We are only looking at the impact of retention over a 2-year period.

In this simulation, I will walk through the numbers for the first recare cycle only: extrapolate the math out for the subsequent recare cycles. I will show a graph that represents the patient flow of these 3 different offices over the entire 24-month period.

# PRE-SIMULATION

|Dental Office|Existing Hygiene Patients|New Patients|Total Hygiene Patients Seen|Proactive Retention|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Shared Practices|200|20|220|94%|
|Industry Standard|200|20|220|82%|
|Average US Practice|200|20|220|68%|

# After One Recare Cycle

The second table, the After One Recare Cycle table below, illustrates what happens to the hygiene patients in the same offices we examined in the previous table: I want to make an important point. Look at the difference between the unappointed patients in the Shared Practices office compared...
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

to the Industry Standard office: The Industry Standard office allowed 3x patients to leave without their next appointment: That is the difference between 82 percent proactive retention and 94 percent proactive retention: On the surface, you might look at that statistic and think 82 percent is close to 94 percent: But, when you consider the number of patients who leave without an appointment, the office that proactively retains 82 percent of their patients is performing 3x worse than the Shared Practices office.

As you can see from the rest of the table, reactive retention is not able to bring many of these patients back in. The result is a large difference in the number of existing patients coming back through hygiene at the beginning of the second recare cycle. This is mainly due to the differences in how well the practices make their patients' next appointments.

# AFTER ONE RECARE CYCLE

|Dental Office|Reappointed Patients|Unappointed Patients|Reactive Retention Rate|Reactively Retained Patients|Cycle 2 Existing Patients|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Shared Practices|207|13|25%|3|210|
|Industry Standard|180|40|10%|4|184|
|Average U.S. Practice|150|70|5%| |153|

The end of the first recare cycle is shown on the far right: Cycle 2 Existing Patients illustrates how many patients will be on the schedule at the beginning of the second recare cycle. Each of the practices will start with a different number of patients on the schedule now because they all retained.
---
# PATIENT RETENTION

At different success rates. At the beginning of the second recare cycle, each practice will get the same number of new patients, 20 per month:

The third table, the Second Recare Cycle table below, illustrates the total patient flow (new patients and existing patients) for each office over the entire 24-month span: You will notice the number of patients each practice saw for Cycle 2 is the number of existing patients at the end of Cycle 1, plus the 20 new patients. That same math is extrapolated out for the rest of our 24-month simulation and shows the final numbers.

# SECOND RECARE CYCLE

|Dental Office|Cycle 1 Patient Flow|Cycle 2 Patient Flow|Cycle 3 Patient Flow|Cycle 4 Patient Flow|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Shared Practices|220|230|240|249|
|Industry Standard|220|204|191|180|
|Average US Practice|220|173|140|118|

I hope the math was not too hard to follow. In case it was, I included a graph below that shows the hygiene-patient flow in each practice over the 24-month period. It contains the same numbers seen in the tables but in a more visual format.

All these offices started in the exact same place and saw the exact same number of new patients over a 2-year period. The office that retains patients to the Shared Practices standard grew its patient base. The offices that had industry standard or average levels of retention both lost patients.

89
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Let's remember the foundational concept of our philosophy: double your hygiene revenue, double your practice.

When you compare the Shared Practices office to the industry-standard practice, the Shared Practices office is seeing 249 patients by fourth recare cycle, while the industry-standard practice is only seeing 180 patients. That means with no additional effort, the Shared Practices office will have a proportionally higher amount of production. Since each dollar of hygiene revenue leads to a predictable amount of total practice revenue.

In theory, a practice seeing 249 patients per month in hygiene will likely produce 38 percent more than the industry standard office seeing only 180 patients per month in hygiene.

Both the industry standard office and the average dental practice lose patients with each recare cycle. What this really means is that the vast majority of dental practices in the United States are silently losing patients each month due to a lack of focus on retention.

Data does not lie, but sometimes it shows us things that are hard to believe initially. Whether you believe the numbers or not; they do not lie. Retaining patients at the current rates leads to practices losing patients each month. When I bought my practice, we were net losing patients each month. It turns out there are a lot more practices like that.

If you want to know how half of the dental practices in the United States collect less than $675,000, take a look at the graph above. The average retention rates of these practices put them in a terrible position when it came to growing a business. Imagine trying to grow a business where every year you have fewer customers than the year before.

The difference between reappointing 82 percent of your patients and 94 percent of your patients is much larger than you might think. That is 3x as.
---
# PATIENT RETENTION

Many patients leaving the office without scheduling the next visit: Once they leave without that next visit, it is an uphill battle to bring them back in: Proactive retention is the single most important thing a practice can do. When you’re being proactive by making appointments for existing patients and adding new patients along the way; you’re filling the bucket and plugging the holes instead of losing water.

You may be wondering: how is my practice losing patients and I’m not noticing it? My theory is that dentists become more productive per patient to keep their revenue close to the same, year over year. Dentists also spend their time taking clinical courses and adding procedures to the practice: This makes it hard to notice the drop in patient flow, especially when practice collections remain steady month over month: But according to the data, the vast majority of dental practices in the US are losing patients each month.

My other theory on why more people are not aware of the loss of patients is how long it takes to notice an effect. When I bought my practice, it was net losing 22 patients per month: That is an attrition rate which amounts to around 1 fewer hygiene patient per day for a practice that had around 16 hygiene patients a day: unlikely to notice this type of change. It is slow and subtle. Yet, a lack of retention long term can be difficult to overcome when trying to grow your practice.

# Strategic Hygiene Openings

When I was a dental student, I interviewed one of the most highly respected people in the dental marketing field: The company he worked for had been in business for approximately 30 years and was considered the gold standard for dental marketing: He told me that he highly recommends his clients not prebook patients 6 months in advance for their cleanings because they will fill all the hygiene.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

openings, which would prevent the practice from taking on new patients. Instead, he advocates for leaving the schedule open to accommodate new patients and to then call existing patients to fill the remaining slots when they are due for their 6-month checkups:

You should now understand why "that is the most destructive piece of advice I've ever heard. Presented by one of the most widely trusted people I have spoken to. He told dentists to retain patients in the least effective way, all to increase the amount of potential marketing a practice could engage in. Sure it would allow for the scheduling of new patients, but it would also prevent existing patients from scheduling appointments - and that's not an effective way to grow your practice. The marketing expert didn't understand the complete picture; he was only looking at the issue through the narrow marketing lens that was seeking to serve new patients. If you had followed his advice, you could have really hurt your practice. I'd imagine a lot of dentists have, which is why even the best practices in the US do not retain as well as they should.

At Shared Practices; we understand that retaining existing patients is the single most important thing a practice can do for its long-term growth: It comes first, before everything else.

Once patient retention is firmly in place, then it is time to evaluate if we need to add openings. That is how we like to ensure we have sufficient ability to bring in new patients. We recommend opening up the hygiene schedule by adding hours (and providers if necessary) to accommodate new patients while also retaining those you already have. This is where we add fuel to the fire by taking a strategic risk and accelerate practice growth:

As discussed when explaining the Dental 3-Pointer, hygiene openings are a key component of our practice growth strategy: The ideal pace to open the hygiene schedule is 2 days per recare cycle. Your team will need to work on filling these openings. The appointments can be filled by reactivating.
---
# Patient Retention

Overdue recare patients or new patients. We will discuss the steps to executing ROF in Chapter 9 when we discuss case studies: We will walk through our growth strategy using examples to illustrate how to implement our philosophy in any practice:

By shooting the Dental 3-Pointer; you will increase the number of patients you serve, and that will ultimately lead to an increase in income. And all dental practice owners should be taking advantage of Strategic Hygiene Openings when available to them. It is important to be careful when taking risks, so be sure you have your patient retention strategies solidified first:

# Takeaways

1. Growing your patient base is the single most impactful thing you can do for practice growth.
2. The most effective way to grow your patient base over time is to improve your retention as much as possible.
3. Existing patients are more important than you realize.
4. Proactive retention is one of the most important components to practice growth.
5. Hygiene openings are the Dental 3-Pointer: Shoot as many as you can reasonably fill. Retain: Open: Fill:
6. The largest advantage you have as a practice owner is to play the numbers game and grow your practice.
7. Long-term practice growth is achieved through growing your patient base using Strategic Hygiene Opening.

Now that you see why focusing on patient retention is one of the most important things you can do for your practice, it's time to focus on treatment retention and why it's key to improving productivity.
---
# CHAPTER 5

# TREATMENT RETENTION

I was sitting in a dental seminar and the guy leading the seminar said, "How much do you want to produce per hour?"

Let's just say my answer was $860, which is how much I personally produced per hour at my productivity peak.

The guy teaching this seminar, who was an industry expert, then explained in detail how to adjust my scheduling systems to achieve that goal. He was so confident in what he had to say, so sure that adjusting my scheduling would enable me to achieve that goal.

|Hygiene Production|Diagnosis|Case Acceptance|Doctor Production|Treatment Retention|Production|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|94|94|94|94|94|94|
---
# Treatment Retention

And no one in the audience questioned him. Except me.

The problem was that the guy was looking at production per hour from the wrong lens: How much you want to produce per hour does not matter: What's important is how much you have available to produce per hour:

The reason I was able to get to over $800 per hour in clinical productivity is because of the amount of treatment I had to do. The practice was between associates, and I worked with a team of 3 dental assistants, 2 of whom were expanded-function assistants, to produce around $5,000-$6,000 of dentistry per day while checking for 3-4 hygienists. I can’t even remember what protocol or system the front desk used to schedule those patients. All I remember about that time is that I never had time to sit down.

When dentists think of productivity, one of the first things that comes to mind is scheduling systems. At seminars, consultants who follow industry standards and who use industry standard terminology push their way of scheduling: They make dentists feel like a new scheduling system will make them more productive and earn them more per hour as a result:

But goal-based scheduling doesn't work. If you arbitrarily pick an amount you want to produce, say $860 per hour, and a patient needs a filling that bills at $120 for the procedure, you would only be able to schedule that person for 8 minutes. Otherwise, you wouldn't meet your hourly goal. Eight minutes is approximately the time it takes a patient to get numb sometimes. You wouldn't even be able to start treating the tooth in that amount of time.

Simply changing how you schedule patients doesn't work effectively to increase productivity.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Your productivity as a dentist, how much you produce per hour, is a result of 3 factors: diagnosis, case acceptance, and scheduling capacity: If you only change how you schedule, it doesn't change how much you diagnose, and it doesn't change case-acceptance rates. All it changes is how efficiently you do the work you already have to do.

To achieve the biggest returns, you must increase the amount of work needing to be completed as opposed to only changing the scheduling system you use to do the work that you already have, which is what the current dental industry standard seems to suggest:

# Moving the Productivity Needle

To move the productivity needle, look at how much you are diagnosing, how much you are accepting, and how much production you can do in the time you work (or how fast you can get the work done). If you work 4 days per week, that's 32 available clinical hours per week or 128 clinical hours per month: So how much production can you do in that time span?

|Case Acceptance|Diagnosis|Scheduling|Productivity|
|---|---|---|---|
|Low| | |High|

For me; during my Super Solo period, the number was around $100,000 per month. I had to do that amount of treatment in the roughly 128-150 clinical hours I had in the office each month:

96
---
# Treatment Retention

Knowing the number is great; but you must also consider that you will be interrupted by the hygienist to examine a patient while doing clinical work on another patient. Many dentists get annoyed and feel the exam is a waste of time. They rush through the exam as quickly as possible and want to get back to clinical work, especially when they are busy. This leads to dentists not taking the exams seriously, and if they are rushing to get through exams, they tend to not diagnose as much. They don't talk to the patients about things that could benefit them. And it leads to missed opportunities.

Think of it this way: a dentist is eating from the dinner table (eating the production they are doing), but at the same time, the dentist must make more food and put it on the table so there's enough to eat on a different day. It's a balancing act between how much you're taking off the table in your schedule that day and how much you're putting back on the schedule for future days.

The only reason I was able to get to Super Solo levels of productivity was because I was performing productive exams with 3-4 hygienists. Through a team-led approach, which we will discuss later in this chapter, my team was able to put a lot of food on the dinner table for me. I did their exams and confirmed or modified treatment plans, then the patients would schedule treatment. As I was producing—or eating, in this example—my team was helping me make more food to eat on future days.

In Practice by Numbers, I like to look at value added on any given day and compare it to what was produced: It will show me how much we are adding to the dinner table compared to how much we took off. This can be an early indicator of either big months or slow months. If you are adding more to the schedule than you are producing you will have bigger months in the future. If you are adding less treatment, then your future will be lighter than your current day.

97
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Often, unless a dentist is booked out 2 weeks with back-to-back cases, what's holding the dentist back is not how fast the dentist can do things; it's how much the dentist has to do.

Focusing on putting more food on the table is a more productive mindset than focusing on how much food you are removing from the table, because ultimately you will get done what your patients need to have done. Why? Because dentists (and people in general) who have more to do are more productive than those who have less.

# Future Production

# Today's Production

# Treaters Room

Instead of fixating on the method in which you schedule patients, focus on how many patients you have who need procedures to be completed. That is what will ultimately lead to increased productivity.

And it starts with the dental exam, not in the operatory where you are performing treatment. Productivity starts in the exam room and ends in the operatory.

When viewed through this lens, you're using an Analytics Based Mindset; you're being proactive instead of reactive. Being proactive ensures you are
---
# Treatment Retention

Productive by focusing on exams versus assuming clinical productivity is out of your control and the result of how you schedule patients. Only when you are booked solid with productive cases for 1-2 weeks do scheduling systems start to really move the needle. Before then, I believe it adds unneeded complexity.

Until then, focus on providing a more productive exam; you will have more work to do and you will have an easier time staying productive. Shared Practices advocates a team-led approach, one in which the dentist and hygienist work together to increase productivity and treatment retention.

# A Team-Led Approach

Making a patient aware of an issue, getting them to agree to take care of it, and then doing the actual work is like pushing a ball up a hill and then shoving it over the edge. If you don't employ a team-led approach, you will do all the work yourself and that can be exhausting and time-consuming. You will be the first person to make a patient aware of an issue, you must explain all the reasons why the treatment should get done, and you must advise the patient what could happen if they don't address the issue. Then you must do the actual dentistry needed.

Naturally, it will be hard to be as productive as possible if you must create awareness, discuss treatment options, answer questions, and perform all the dentistry for every patient. There is a limit to how much you can accomplish. Dentists, in general, do not fully empower their teams to adopt a team-led approach.

The fatigue that results from not adopting a team-led approach commonly leads dentists to diagnose less and spend less time explaining why treatment is needed, which is necessary to help patients get on board.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

If you use a team-led process is in place for auxiliary hygienists to co-diagnose. They approach;ᵃ rolling to get the ball up the hill so that all the dentist has to do is push it over the edge. Most of the work is being done together as a unit (dentist plus auxiliary hygienists).

A team-led approach to co-diagnosis and case acceptance is what allows a practice to perform at its best. By sharing the load, the team is able to spend more time making patients aware of their issues and potential solutions the practice can offer: The team tees up the exam for the dentist, allowing for a brief exam that pushes patients over the edge: This is the way the top producers set up their clinical teams, which ultimately allows for dentists to be as productive as they want:

# 1. Diagnosis

The first aspect that leads to treatment retention is diagnosis. You must first diagnose. You cannot create a treatment for an issue you did not plan to diagnose.

Analytics have shown that when you look at a dental practice, a dentist will diagnose differently depending on which hygienist the dentist is working with: With some hygienists they may diagnose twice as much per patient than others: When I first saw the data, it was mind-blowing: But after I thought about it, it made sense.

A hygienist works with each patient for 50 minutes to an hour, and the dentist examines the patient for 5 to 10 minutes. The hygienist is able to get a more thorough look at all of the patient needs. When the hygienist understands the treatment philosophies of a practice, they are able to do a lot of the communication and highlight issues that the dentist might miss. However, this requires setting up clinical protocols and training your.
---
# TREATMENT ReteNtion

hygiene team to identify issues, to take intraoral pictures of the issues, and to bring those issues to light with the patient, so that when the dentist walks into the room, it's just a little roll of the ball over the hill.

For that reason; a big part of our hygiene coaching program focuses on treatment retention: Dentists do not have time to discuss every single issue with every patient: By training the hygiene team on an office-wide treatment philosophy, practices can begin to co-diagnose as a team. This leads to a measurable increase in diagnosis rate, which is the rate at which an issue is discussed with a patient.

When everyone follows the same treatment philosophy, night guards get discussed every time a patient has occlusal wear. Smaller, less urgent needs that often go unaddressed in an exam are also discussed with the hygienist, such as the stain that might be a cavity or their occlusal wear:

A team-led approach has been proven to highlight the needs patients have, more so than if patients relied solely on dentists to diagnose. A team-led approach begins the conversation between the patient and the clinical team prior to the dentist's arrival. I hope this adds a whole other perspective on evaluating the performance of a hygienist that I believe our industry standard currently ignores.

# Case Acceptance

Case acceptance is the second aspect of treatment retention. It's not enough to simply diagnose. Without case acceptance, patients won’t return for treatment, and your efforts to diagnose will have been in vain.

In general, people need to hear something multiple times before they are able to say yes. When it comes to dentistry, if the hygienist starts the conversation and the dentist backs up the hygienist by having the same conversation with the patient, it increases the likelihood that the patient will be agreeable to the treatment suggestion, simply because they heard it from multiple people.
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

strong handoff to the front desk, and you've done everything in your power to get the patient to agree. It's our practice to the patient and the team in the best position to facilitate treatment. It is important to understand that it is our job to provide information on what is needed and why it is needed. We also must communicate the consequences of not electing for the recommended treatment. We can then facilitate a strong handoff with the administrative team so they can discuss financial options with the patient.

An Analytics Based Mindset includes first understanding the entire case-acceptance process. Then implementing an intentional strategy: And finally, looking at the data regularly and adjusting as needed. Ultimately, it is the patient's choice whether or not they move forward with treatment. It is important to understand that not everyone will say yes to everything: To use a baseball analogy, nobody has a perfect batting average. If you follow the team-led process I outlined above, you'll perform well over the average of your exams. You do not need to stress about getting every single patient to agree to treatment; it might not fit in everyone's life. You will do well over the average of all your patients with an analytics based team-led process.

# Real-Life Case Study

# Case-Acceptance Metrics

For our third case study, let's dive deep into the case-acceptance metrics of our next real client; Dr. Blake Anderson. Blake purchased his practice right out of school. The practice has 9 operatories and historically collected around $750K per year.

The unique challenges Blake was presented with were due to the age of the practice. The practice was very old-school and declining slowly each year. It was not adequately set up with a digital practice management software, which made due diligence very challenging. As you will see below, his initial staff was also resistant to change:
---
# TREATMENT RETENTION

Blake's current growth is what we would characterize as a Solo to Productive Solo Transition. In 2022, Blake's practice collected around $1.3 million: That amounts to a 73 percent growth, all within 18 months of purchasing his practice. Blake plans on getting an associate in the future and undergoing a Solo to Group Transition. (You will learn more about all the avatars in Chapter 7 and the various transformations in Chapter 9.)

When it comes to Blake's treatment retention, Blake saw a big change after his first 6 months. When Blake bought the practice, he had inherited a long-time hygienist and had a difficult time getting her to buy into a team-led approach to treatment retention.

I asked Blake what he did to drastically improve his practice's treatment retention. He talked about how the big change occurred when his original hygienist left the practice. He replaced the experienced hygienist with a new grad, who was open-minded. Blake noticed a big shift after he started working with a new hygienist who embraced a team-led approach to case acceptance.

To illustrate the difference Blake noticed with his new hygienist, let's look at his case-acceptance metrics. We will compare his treatment retention with his old and new hygienist by looking at our case-acceptance metrics for the months of January and December of 2022. Remember; Blake purchased this practice in July of 2021. In January 2022, he was working with the older hygienist he inherited. In December of 2022, he was working with the new hygienist:

|Case-acceptance Metrics|Original Hygienist|New Hygienist|
|---|---|---|
|Diagnosis Rate|34%|46%|
|Patient Acceptance|68%|86%|
|Treatment Acceptance|29%|26%|
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Let me explain what these numbers mean. The diagnosis rate means that they initially diagnosed an issue in 34 percent of the patients who came in for exams. This is the top end of the case-acceptance process. The other 66 percent of patients who came in were sent home after being told they did not need any additional treatment.

A good target here for a recare exam is usually around 40 percent. A new-patient exam should be much higher, around 70 percent: This is a metric that is dependent on the patient population. A younger patient population will have fewer needs than an older patient population.

An office's total diagnosis rate is the combination of all the exams, so in this case 34 percent; which we would initially call low. After implementing a team-led approach with his new hygienist, Blake improved his diagnosis rate to 46 percent: This was a combination of improving performance in both recare and new-patient exams, all achieved through a team-led approach: with the same dentist performing both sets of exams.

You may be thinking 12 percent is not a big improvement: With his first hygienist, 34 out of 100 patients were being presented a treatment plan. Now, there are an additional 12 patients being presented treatment plans based on the same initial 100 patients. That is a 35 percent growth in the number of patients who enter into the practice's treatment retention process. That is a lot more treatment balls to get rolling: All because he has an extra set of eyes looking at every patient and bringing up issues before he even walks into the room!

The next metric is patient acceptance, which measures the number of patients who schedule an appointment or have completed the treatment that was diagnosed. Essentially, it measures the number of patients who say yes to something that was suggested.
---
# TREATMENT RETENTION

When Blake started at his practice, he performed around the national average for this metric. Sixty-eight percent is slightly higher than the national average for patient acceptance. This means over 32 percent of patients who go to the dentist in the United States leave without doing a single thing suggested by the dentist:

With a team-led approach, Blake was able to improve his patient acceptance to 86 percent. We generally like to see patient acceptance over 80 percent for a solo dentist. Naturally, with associate dentists, group practices perform worse at patient acceptance. We do not like to see patient acceptance drop below 75 percent in a group practice.

The third metric in our case-acceptance overview is treatment acceptance: This measures the total amount of treatment that was scheduled or completed as a percentage of what was diagnosed.

You will notice here that the number went down. When Blake started working with us, 29 percent of treatment was scheduled/completed. Now, with a seemingly better process, it is down to 26 percent.

A team-led approach has increased Blake's diagnosis. They now diagnose 35 percent more often than when they started. Patients also accept treatment 86 percent of the time, as opposed to 68 percent of the time. Treatment acceptance is lower because they are diagnosing more per patient. This is actually a good sign. If you remember from our first case study, Amanda also saw a decrease in her treatment acceptance. When treatment acceptance is too high, it often means you may not be offering ideal solutions or comprehensively diagnosing.

Implants are a great example of this principle. A patient cannot physically accept later parts of implant treatment because it takes months to complete. A patient cannot schedule or complete their needed implant crown until the implant has been placed and has had sufficient time to integrate.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

This is why this metric can be a little misleading sometimes. It is important to understand that there are hundreds of metrics for every dental office, and they each provide a piece of information: The only way to fully understand the metrics is to consider them as part of the whole picture.

I hope looking at Blake's practice illustrated the various case-acceptance metrics and how to evaluate the treatment retention component of a dental practice. This case also illustrates the benefit of empowering your team to be a part of the case-acceptance process. Blake has experienced drastically improved results from his shift toward a team-led approach to treatment retention.

# Here is Blake's journey in his own words:

I heard about Shared Practices just as I was starting dental school. As both SP and I grew, our visions seemed to align more and more. When I was finally looking for a practice of my own, and having figured out my own vision for my practice, having the support of Shared Practices just made sense. After doing the due diligence for the practice with Shared Practices, all the areas of opportunity were explained. That's when I realized that having a coach would really help me stay grounded and not get carried away in the wrong decisions. Having that coach allowed us to grow and we've almost doubled the revenue in just a little over 1 year of ownership. By the end of the second full year, I'll be ready for an associate. My coach has helped me tremendously to ensure I could get to this point. I like to think I could have figured it out all on my own, but it would not have been worth the headaches, confusion, drama, etc. that would have come with it.
---
# TREATMENT RETENTION

# Scheduling

Scheduling is the last important aspect to focus on when it comes to treatment retention. As I discussed previously, scheduling efficiency does not make you productive: However, it does allow you to get work done quickly. Your objective when scheduling should be to get the work available to you done in the fastest way possible and as soon as possible so that you're available for additional work.

No patient has ever told me they want to be in a dental office longer than they have to. Patients won't be upset if your team is well-run and doesn’t waste time during procedures, completing treatment in an efficient way.

When scheduling, keep in mind that data shows patients often cancel appointments when scheduled out more than 2 weeks, stating they've changed their minds or have other conflicts. If you've talked to a patient about an issue and they accept treatment, it's key to get the patient in quickly while they are still willing and able to get the work done.

Dentists who can provide treatment efficiently are able to schedule patients quickly and retain more of the accepted treatment than those who have longer wait times. And that cuts down on cancellations and improves overall production.

If you diagnose as a clinical team, obtain treatment acceptance as a team, and complete the work efficiently, the result will be the highest hourly production possible. The key is understanding that the average is better thought of over the course of a month instead of the course of any specific day. Some days will naturally be more productive than others, but over the course of a month, productivity will even out.

A team-led approach provides numerous benefits to you, your patients, and your practice.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# Hygiene Production

As you have seen, hygienists are extremely important when it comes to increasing diagnosis and case acceptance. The industry standard mindset is that hygiene must pay for itself but if you acknowledge that the hygienist is essential to increasing diagnosis and improving patient acceptance, you won't be concerned with the hygiene productivity ratios everyone else raves about: You will know each hygienist has great value to the overall practice beyond the actual hygienist's production.

In addition to improving dentists' productivity as a result of diagnosis and improving case acceptance, hygienists can improve their own productivity by providing preventative fluoride treatment, periodontal therapy, and other services that could benefit patients.

But remember, you don't grow your practice significantly by being productive in hygiene: It helps with profitability because hygiene services have few associated costs but it won't grow revenue in a significant way. Hygienists are the heartbeat of the practice in a lot of ways; it's important to be aware that the areas that provide the most value are in patient retention and scheduled treatment. Neither of those have anything to do with how much they produce. The main issue with the current dental industry standard is that it is built to optimize hygienists' productivity.

We have since learned hygiene production is profitable, but the greatest value a hygienist provides to a dental practice is actually in long-term patient-base growth and scheduling treatment. Yet another industry standard belief bites the dust.
---
# TREATMENT RETENTION

# Takeaways

1. Hourly production is a function of how much work you do over the course of a month, not what happens in any given hour; so when calculating your hourly production, consider how much you produce over the course of a month.
2. Dentist productivity is a function of 3 things: how much you diagnose, how much of that is accepted, and how fast you can do the work.
3. A team-led approach is more effective and sustainable than one that is not. When a practice utilizes a team-led approach, you won't be using all your energy to roll a ball up the hill and over the edge by yourself. You will rely on the strength and skills of your staff to help you push the ball.
4. Hygienists are the heartbeat of treatment retention, and that is where they provide a lot of their short-term value. Patient retention is where they provide their long-term value.
5. You should improve hygienist productivity through fluoride and periodontal treatments. This is very profitable revenue. It just does not lead to a significant amount of revenue.

When it comes to treatment retention, the best results are achieved through a team-led approach: In the next chapter, we look at revenue retention so that you understand how the money flows through practices after dentistry is produced.

109
---
# CHAPTER 6

# REVENUE RETENTION

T from Tucson, Arizona, which is 2 hours south of where Shared Practices is headquartered in Phoenix, Arizona. My favorite hometown hike is called Seven Falls, which is a really high waterfall consisting of 7 smaller waterfalls that cascade into one another and ultimately lead into a river. At the bottom of each fall is a pool of water with the pools subsequently increasing in size as the water progresses toward the ground, creating a massive water pool at the bottom of the last fall that ultimately flows into the nearby river.

I’ve seen Seven Falls during times of floods in monsoon season; of drought when there’s a dry desert; and during different stages of water levels in between the monsoons and the drought. What really stands out is that Seven Falls has two very distinct appearances: where the water falls in a light trickle and where the water flows fully. When the falls are flowing lightly, so too is the nearby river. When there's a lot of water pushing through the falls, the river's water flow is extremely aggressive.

The falls are like your dental practice, depending on whether you’re focused on Analytics Based Practice Management (heavy water flow during monsoon season) or the old standard way of running a practice (trickling water flow during drought).

In dental practices, if you accurately understand where and how your expenses get paid and how the profitability of your practice works, you will...
---
# Revenue Retention

Have an accurate way to predict how much water is flowing through the waterfall and into your practice. And you will be able to accurately predict how big the pool will be at the bottom of the fall, which, in this analogy, is your take-home pay:

We discussed how a practice flows and the trickle-down effect in Chapter 3, but in this chapter we'll take a more detailed look at it to show you how profit works so that you can increase the profit flowing through the falls and into the final massive pool that then flows into the river and ultimately into your pocket.

# Overhead Percentages as Industry Standard

When it comes to industry standard beliefs on profitability, the overhead percentage mindset is the first thing that comes to mind. From our perspective, using overhead percentages as a guiding metric for decision-making is a flawed concept.

As a practice owner turned chief financial officer, I've never been able to get behind this overhead percentage mindset: This contradicts our principle of proactivity: We make decisions looking forward, not back.

In addition, the practice of looking at overhead percentages assumes collections are constant. But that's incorrect: Yes, expenses are typically constant; but revenue fluctuates a lot, and when revenue changes, it throws those percentages way off.

Bottom line: looking at overhead percentages is not accurate for a growing practice, a practice whose water flow (revenue) changes from week to week, month to month. For a stable practice where revenue is consistent, overhead percentages provide an accurate piece of information to refine your management.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# The Journey of a Dental Dollar

# Dental Production

# Collections

# Variable Costs

# Fixed Costs

# Profitability (take-home pay)

Unlike Seven Falls, which has 7 distinct pools of water; the dental dollar creates 5 pools of water along its waterfall journey as the water makes its way from the top of the falls to the bottom and ultimately to the river:

1. The first water pool consists of dental production.
2. The second water pool consists of collections.
3. The third water pool consists of variable costs.
4. The fourth water pool consists of fixed costs.
5. Lastly, the dental dollar lands in a pool at the bottom of the falls that flows into the river, spitting out profitability (take-home pay).

Let’s look at each of these aspects along the journey in more detail.
---
# ReVeNUE RETENTION

# Production

The first water pool, production, begins with a hygienist or dentist who performs treatment on a patient: Remember from earlier; you cannot collect what you did not produce. One larger takeaway from this book is that improving production is where the majority of your focus and energy should be. Increasing production starts the cascade of water that will then flow down: The more that comes through the top, the more will end up in the bottom.

Simply put: an increase in the amount of production most likely equals an increase in take-home pay:

# Collections

Flowing from production, the dollar makes its way down the falls to the collection pool, where the practice either collects the dollar from an insurance company or a patient: This is what we typically classify as practice revenue. Throughout this book I use the terms collections and revenue interchangeably: Concern about collections should not create barriers to entry. Dentists are always so worried about collecting money owed that it can sometimes introduce firm financial policies which ultimately dissuade patients from getting treatment. This is putting collections ahead of production: Remember, that is not how the journey works.

Look for ways to prevent barriers to entry: The best financial policies are those that are responsible, buttoned-up strategies that also drive production. Implementing financing in-house, third-party patient financing, in-house payment plans, or anything that makes the patient more likely to accept treatment, even if it slightly reduces your collections rate, is generally a good trade-off. This is another dental moneyball concept: A practice can accept some strategic risk in a looser collections policy for the potential trade-off of production.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

At a minimum, ensure your collections policies are not inhibiting production: For example, if you have an abrasive policy where patients must pay up front prior to scheduling, patients will be deterred by the policy and it will hurt your production, which in turn hurts your collections and ultimately your take-home pay.

Therefore, you must consider the way you collect from patients and how it will impact how much you can produce. Pick collection policies that are responsible, patient-friendly, make sure you get paid, and push treatment.

When it comes to collections, the most important thing to look at is your accounts receivable (AR) days: Typically, you want 30 days or less; meaning that for every dollar you produce, it takes, on average, 30 days or less to collect it: At my peak, I got it down to 11 days.

If your AR days are greater than 30, make sure you understand which area you are not performing well in (patient accounts receivable, insurance accounts receivable, or both). You can find this information by creating reports in your practice management software.

Usually if you have an issue, it means you’re not doing something procedurally correct. For example, you could be failing to attach pictures to insurance claims, so they are getting denied: Or your staff is not collecting from self-pay patients before they leave the office.

Once you’ve identified issues, look back through your process to find where they are coming from and change the process to mitigate the issues.

# Variable Costs

Now that you’ve produced a dollar and collected that dollar; the dollar flows to the variable-costs pool where you use the dollar to pay for what makes dentistry possible. This includes expenses such as supplies, lab expenses, and paying other dentists who receive a percentage of their production or collections.
---
# ReveNUE ReTention

These costs change with the amount of dentistry you do, hence the name "variable." Variable costs are paid before any of your other fixed expenses can be paid. So they must be accounted for first.

Once variable costs are paid, you are left with your gross profit margin: This is all the money available to you as the practice owner to pay regular business expenses. This includes all other expenses that do not directly lead to more production:

Gross profit is an interesting concept. If you have not paid any of your fixed costs, then you get none of it. All gross profit goes toward paying your fixed costs, which we will discuss in more detail next. After all your fixed costs are paid, your gross profit goes straight to your take-home pay. This is why adding extra production or extra patients is so profitable. Once you are past your break-even point, every extra dollar of gross profit is take-home pay: This is an important concept to understand; I will discuss it multiple times in this chapter:

# Fixed Costs

The next pool is fixed costs. This is the set number of things it takes to keep your business open and operating: Staff, rent, practice loan, and all other expenses are usually considered fixed costs.

My big issue with the overhead percentage mindset is that in dentistry, most of these fixed costs are pretty consistent month over month. Overhead percentages make that concept harder to conceptualize for dentists. They think both their expenses and revenue change month over month. But in fact, their expenses are more or less constant.

Now that we understand fixed costs, let’s look at what happens with our gross profit. This is all the money we have left after we collected money and paid for the cost of providing dental services.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

First, the gross profit is used to pay those fixed costs. These expenses are: staff, which is your largest category; facility costs, which includes rent or the cost of your facility and maintenance; debt service, which is the loan that most dentists have taken out to acquire a dental practice or start one from scratch; and growth costs, which are expenses you incur to invest in the future of the practice, such as consulting and marketing for new patients. Any additional expenses I did not mention are usually considered fixed costs and are categorized as general business expenses.

After all fixed costs are paid, you've reached your break-even point: There's a very important inflection point that happens when you hit your break-even point. Once you've reached that point, every dollar of gross revenue flows directly to your take-home pay: Dentistry is a high-fixed-cost business. The heavy lifting, financially speaking, is getting to that break-even point. Once you are there, the only expenses you have on new dentistry are your variable costs.

For each extra dollar that is collected past break-even for a solo dentist with no associates, 90 cents of each dollar of that additional revenue will drop straight into the dentist's pocket: What's left of the dental dollar after paying these costs flows into take-home pay. The key to a lot of take-home pay is to produce an amount that is way past your break-even point. Then all you need to do is collect it quickly and keep your variable costs low.

# Take-Home Pay

The final pool is take-home pay: The size of your take-home pay will be determined by how much water flowed through the waterfalls, whether it trickled down or flowed freely, and how much water made it to each subsequent pool during the dental dollar's journey:

116
---
# REVENUE RETENTION

There are 2 distinct periods of profitability in the dental-dollar journey: (1) the period before you've hit your break-even point, where your gross profit goes toward paying fixed expenses; and (2) the period after you've paid fixed expenses, where the remainder of that dollar, up to 90 cents for every additional dollar collected above your break-even point, is take-home pay:

My big issue with our industry’s love of percentages is that it is misleading regarding what is actually happening: In each month, there is a period where the practice owner makes no money. Then there is the remainder of the month where the owner is making a large portion of their income on each dollar of extra collections. The whole concept of percentages makes dentists think they are earning a constant percentage of all of their revenue. This is simply untrue and misleading:

# Break-Even Point Analysis

Most dentists don't understand the importance of knowing their break-even point. But it's essential that you do. Adopting a break-even point mindset is key to putting money into your pocket.

|Revenue|Gross Profit|Take Home Pay|Slope of Line|=Variable Costs|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Break-Even Point|Fixed Costs|Gross Profit|Paying Fixed Costs| |

15 Days of the Month

30

117
---
# DENTALMONEYBALL

Profitability is not simply a percentage of the money you bring into the practice. The further you get away from your break-even point; the more profitability you will have: All revenue is not equally profitable. Revenue past your break-even point is very profitable:

When you adopt this new framework of thinking, you will understand that when collections/revenue drops, it disproportionately hurts profitability. Dropping revenue by 10 percent doesn’t drop profitability by 10 percent; it drops it by 20 to 30 percent. Conversely, increasing revenue by 10 percent will increase profitability significantly, by 20 to 30 percent at times.

Now that you know and understand this concept, it should motivate you to take on any extra work that is possible on a given day: For example, if a patient needs something done and you have time to do it that day, 'get it done. It's the most efficient way to be profitable, because you're extending past the break-even point;

It’s why we like practice growth as a means to increase profitability. And the further past your break-even point you are, the more comfortable and profitable things are - all because you're putting more money into your pocket:

Adopt this new way of thinking about profitability, expenses, and revenue in a way that helps you, not in a way that hurts. I used to fear calls with my accountant because he didn't understand the concept that a practice could grow its collections. During those tough months when my practice struggled and was extremely unprofitable, my meetings with the accountant were difficult because we were looking at percentages. Once I understood the journey of the dental dollar and how to grow profitability by increasing production, it gave me a sense of control because I was in control of my expenses, and I understood what was happening financially in my practice:
---
# Revenue Retention

And with that came a sense of ease and relaxation—and fear of the unknown slipped away. Hopefully this chapter demystified the journey of a dental dollar for you: From production to take-home pay, it is much more simple if you think about the dental dollar as a journey and the majority of your expenses as fixed numbers. Your revenue is what fluctuates; not your expenses.

# Takeaways

1. Overhead percentages are largely misused in dentistry: They are a piece of information for stable practices, but they rarely tell the whole story.
2. You cannot collect what you do not produce, so don't let your collections policies get in the way of production.
3. Understand that your gross profit is what you use to pay the majority of your expenses; it's your collections after paying variable costs. The rest of your expenses are fixed. Once you have paid all fixed costs, you have hit your break-even point.
4. You want to get to the break-even point as fast as possible each month. The rest of the dental dollars you collect that month are mostly your take-home pay.

Now that you understand the journey of a dental dollar and how looking at only the percentages in your practice is not the best framework, you hopefully have a new mindset to guide you when monitoring the financial operations of your dental practice.

It’s time to turn the corner to Part 3. We've explained the meat and potatoes of our data-driven practice management beliefs. Now, we are going to discuss how to apply these principles to get results in any dental practice.
---
NO_CONTENT_HERE
---
# PART II

# TEAM AND EXECUTION

121
---
# CHAPTER 7

# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

When you attend dental seminars, the speaker often gives Monday-morning pearls, which are actionable items you can immediately implement come Monday morning, when you return to your practice. You hear all this stuff and then you go back to your office, try some of it for 2 or 3 weeks, and discover nothing has changed in your practice. Nothing has moved the practice in a long-term way: Any changes made without being in service of a compelling vision are often a waste of time and effort. That’s because one-off tips and other advice that is repeated at seminars are not what moves practices. Much more critical to long-term change is the presence of a clear direction: Usually these tips are not working together for a common outcome.

In order to achieve long-term growth in your dental office, which involves having a plan and sticking to the plan every day - for 9 to 12 months - you must understand where you are, where you want to go, and what path you must take to get there.

I would say that the hardest part of implementing our philosophy is getting the entire office to stick to it every day: It is essential to use the metrics we discuss to hold team members accountable to a certain standard of performance. This is much easier said than done. That is what the next 3 chapters will discuss.

122
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

Up until this point, we've talked about how to grow a practice; but we haven't talked about your practice specifically. Each practice inhabits a different phase, and there are different steps that need to be taken to grow it; often culminating in different growing pains that, once experienced, create lasting results.

The first step to getting real results is a self-diagnosis: where you are now and where you want to go next. That involves understanding the different practice models and the pros and cons of each, which will enable you to identify which practice model is your current starting point. Just as importantly, you should be thinking about which practice model you'd like to grow into.

|Productive Per|Solo|Productive Solo|Patient Track|Group|Profitable Group|$ Mega Group|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Patient Flow|Track|Super Solo| | | | |

# PSS Ownership Models

The PSS (Profitable, Simple, Sustainable) ownership framework is the bedrock of how we think about practice vision. When defining this framework, we started by looking at which features of practices would be ideal long term for most any dentist, regardless of vision. We felt most dentists want comfortable, healthy profit margins achieved in the simplest possible way while ensuring that a practice is sustainable.

Sustainability means something different to each dentist: Generally, we felt that practices requiring needless complexity to operate are not sustainable. We also felt that practices not aligned with the owner's long-term vision are not sustainable.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

For instance, if an aspiring group practice owner who, with crystal clarity, sees himself as the architect of a 12 operatory, 3-dentist Mega Group practice opts to buy a 3 operatory fixer-upper, then he might be buying a practice that's not in service of his vision. When I was recording Practice Underwater, I had a guest (true example) who had just purchased a 3 operatory practice. When I was preparing for the interview, I was thinking about a Solo to Productive Solo Transition. When I started the interview, the dentist told me he had just bought the office in hopes of growing it into a group. Needless to say, the road to this dentist's ideal practice is a long road. One that could have been shortened by buying a practice that was a better fit for their vision:

The chart illustrates the growth stages of a dental practice. Each stage has a name that we use as an avatar to classify practices. Over 99 percent of dental practices can be classified on this chart. Later in this chapter; I will walk through what each of these practices looks like: The first step is identifying where you are currently on this diagram: Then identify where you want to take your practice.

Of all of these avatars, we feel there are 2 long-term destinations that best represent our PSS philosophy: Productive Solo and Profitable Group. These 2 stages of a dental practice are profitable to own, relatively simple to operate, and sustainable long term when compared to other phases of a dental practice:

For more advanced practice owners who have been in either of those stages for a while, they may be inclined to explore Super Solo or growing their Mega practice into a Group. These do not fit exactly within our framework because they are more advanced practice styles that often require more complicated operations: We tend to have a lot of clients choose the Mega Group after they get a taste of predictable practice growth. It is a more complicated operation, but driven entrepreneurial dentists enjoy that type of.
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

In order to illustrate the utility of practice avatars, I will first highlight the single biggest mistake I made in my first 12 months of ownership. I was treating the practice I bought (2 dentists, 2 hygienists, 2 assistants, and 2 front-office team members) like a group practice when it was, in fact, a Productive Solo practice. Because I misclassified my practice, all my decision-making was incorrect: I made decisions thinking my practice was a group, but it was really a Productive Solo with 2 dentists.

This became clear to me after my epiphany when I realized we had enough patients for 1.2 dentists. The poor management decisions I made during those first 12 months were because I had misclassified my practice: I overstaffed my practice to the point of losing money because I thought I had the wrong type of practice.

I'm not the only one who has made mistakes due to misclassification. Think back to the Practice Underwater guest who bought the 3 operatory practice wanting a group. That’s why it’s so important to begin by classifying your practice correctly. It helps you figure out where your rowboat is right now. You can then more accurately align your rowboat toward where you want to go. It's impossible to head in the right direction if you do not know where you are starting relative to your desired destination.

As I describe each practice model, align your rowboat with where you are right now (which type of practice you have) and aim it toward where you are rowing to (or where you want your practice to go). In Chapter 9, I’ll show you the steps to get there using generalized case studies that talk about the different types of transitions.

125
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

# Individual Practices

Individual practices consist of 1 dentist and varying auxiliary staff, depending on the type of practice: Solo, Productive Solo, and Super Solo.

|Solo Practices|Productive Solo|Super Solo|
|---|---|---|
|1 Dentist|1 Dentist|1 Dentist|
|1 Hygienist|2 Hygienists|2-3 Hygienists|
|1 Front Desk|2 Assistants|Office Manager|
| |2 Front Desk|2 Additional Front Desk|
|Revenue: &lt; $750k|Revenue: $1M-$1.5M|Revenue: $1.75-$2M|

# Solo Practice

Solo practices account for 60 percent of the dental practices in the United States. We call this practice the one-one-one. It consists of 1 dentist with 1 hygienist, 1 assistant, and 1 front-office team member. The practice usually does less than $900,000 in yearly collections.

In this practice, the dentist usually works 4 days a week. With only 1 hygienist, the dentist is not seeing that many patients, and therefore the collections that flow through the waterfall do not leave a lot of water for the last pool (take-home pay).
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

To double the revenue in a Solo practice, we simply double the amount of hygiene patients seen daily, and you will create a Productive Solo.

Through the lens of PSS, a Solo practice traditionally scores as follows:

# Profitable: Maybe

With 1 hygienist' $ worth of patients, the top-line revenue number remains fairly capped around $800,000. With a low overhead, this practice style can be profitable enough; depending entirely upon the owner's goals, preferences around lifestyle design, and individual needs.

In my opinion, this is not satisfactory for most practice owners. There are certainly many associates who make more than some Solo practice owners. When compared to the profitability of a Productive Solo practice, with only an arguably marginal increase in complexity, it's hard to justify the income in this practice model long term.

# Simple: Yes

Dental practice operations don't get any simpler than administering a practice of 1 hygienist, 1 assistant, and 1 front-office team member. Fewer moving parts yield proportionately fewer concerns than a larger practice. Communication is a relative breeze with only 4 people.

# Sustainable: Maybe

Operationally, the simplicity of this style lends itself well to checking for one column of hygiene. A dental career of 30+ years, as checking for 2+ columns (for most) is easier than checking for one column. Financial sustainability is the question mark, and it is wholly dependent on the dentist.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Frankly, if the principles of the SP philosophy are understood and implemented, one must actively try scaling in order to resist remaining as a Solopractice instead of progressing to become a Productive Solo or beyond. I have a hard time wrapping my mind around why someone wouldn't want to grow into a Productive Solo from here.

# Productive Solo

The industry standard million-dollar office we have all heard about is a Productive Solo practice, and it's classified as a 2-2-2. One dentist with 2 hygienists, 2 assistants, and 2 front-office team members. This practice enjoys a revenue of $1.0 to $1.5 million, with the dentist typically netting $400,000 per year. The dentist works, on average, 4 days per week, and this type of practice usually has 4 to 6 operatories.

We like this model so much more than the Solo practice because there is significantly more profit. There’s more water flowing through the waterfall because you are doubling your assistants as a result of doubling your hygienists and doubling your front-desk team to support the practice. In this model, roles are clearly defined: For the front office, one individual works as a patient-care coordinator, and the other works as a treatment coordinator. No distinction is usually made between the hygienists and assistants.

In a Productive Solo practice, there are 3 paths forward:

1. If you aspire to build a practice that is less clinically dependent on you, the path would be to move toward a group practice. We call this path a Solo to Group Transition.
2. If you want to focus on larger cases and become more personally productive, the path would be to move toward a Super Solo practice.
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

If you wish to maintain top-line revenue, you may decide to remain productive solo, orienting your focus on managing expenses; structuring the clinical schedule in a way that appeals to you; and finding ways to cut insurance to increase your profit through higher fees.

For those in the last group, wishing to maintain the current approximate practice size, both in terms of team members and patient volume, it may be advisable to use the growth you do experience to cut insurances. If you have an excess of patients, cut your worst insurance plans so that those patients are out of network, which will result in a more profitable practice without necessitating additional work.

Through the lens of PSS, a Productive Solo practice traditionally scores as follows:

- Profitable: Yes
- With 2 hygienists' worth of patients, the top-line revenue number can surpass $1,000,000, often approaching or exceeding $1,200,000. With a well-manicured overhead, this practice style can be highly profitable, relative to the owner's goals, preferences around lifestyle design, and individual needs.
- This practice style should be a desirable landing spot for the majority of dentists; as it tends to offer a strong level of compensation - oftentimes far more than a Solo practice without the added moving parts of a group practice.
- Simple: Yes
- Operating a Productive Solo doesn't require substantially more leadership acumen than does a Solo practice.
- When first administering a practice of 1 hygienist, 1 assistant, and 1 front-office team member; one develops his/her ways of managing.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Predictable to add to managing a practice, and it tends to be more an existing team with established ways of functioning than to build a method of practicing from scratch: There’s no need to concern oneself with "cleaning up another dentist's work or implementing exhaustive quality control measures.

# Sustainable: Yes

Operationally, as with the Solo, the simplicity of this style lends itself well to a dental career of 30+ years. Checking for 2 hygiene columns, when one's schedule is constructed intentionally and one hygienist is trained to lead hygiene appointments, can be done well and without undue stress most days. Financial sustainability is far more likely as a Productive Solo than as a Solo, due in no small part to the doubling of hygiene (and likely new-patient) interactions, and thus the doubling of opportunities to diagnose and source treatment. Productive Solo is one of the two places where we feel it is sustainable long term; there is no need to grow out of this avatar if you do not want to.

# Super Solo

There is scarcely a more profitable way to be a dentist than by embracing the Super Solo model. As the owner of a Super Solo practice, you’re operating a large practice without paying other dentists (and the team required to support them), and therefore haven’t bloated the practice's fixed costs. In a Super Solo practice, the practice typically collects $1.6 million or more in a calendar year; however, to do that with 1 dentist, the practice requires a greater degree of complexity. To get to the Super Solo level of productivity per clinical hour by yourself, you must do something above and beyond the industry norm: You'll need 130.
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

An office manager in place to manage the operation: You might have 2 additional front-office team members and additional assistants. By beefing up your team for a larger, more complicated operation, you can focus on larger cases and provide customer service at a higher level, which will be necessary in this type of practice.

Many Super Solo practices are outfitted as follows: 2 to 3 hygienists, 3 assistants, and 3 front-office team members (one of whom is a true office manager).

Though the overall cost to employ a larger team is undeniable, the only way to reliably maintain such a large single-dentist operation is to maintain a well-trained, self-governing high-caliber team. As trite as it sounds; a Super Solo practice owner can happily afford to see his/her team costs occupy 25 to 30 percent of top-line revenue on the profit and loss statement. Think of it as a fee you willingly pay to keep you in the seat from which you deliver the most value to your practice: the clinician's stool.

But watch out for burnout: If you're carrying all the production of that large a practice with your own 2 hands, it can feel like you're on roller skates, zipping from one thing to the next.

As you may remember from the Treatment Retention chapter of this book, I had a short Super Solo stint in my career: I did it by having an extremely well-trained team of 3 assistants and 4 hygienists. Between the 8 of us on the clinical team, I was able to personally produce over $800/hour of clinical dentistry while checking for 4 hygienists. I am forever biased against the Super Solo model because of this period in my career: I find the daily clinical toll of this model to be unsustainable for me: I dreaded the daily clinical load and found myself exhausted at the end of each day, although I will admit it was a very profitable time as a practice owner.

Through the lens of PSS, a Super Solo practice traditionally scores as follows:

131
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Profitable: Yes

If you’re wanting a practice collecting over $1,600,000 with the overhead of a Productive Solo practice, then this is the style for you. If you can shoulder the clinical and administrative load diagnosing from 2 to 3 hygienists, all while offering a wide array of clinical services, usually extending into the realm of one or more specialties, affords unbeatable income potential. This is likely the most straightforward way to 7-figure take-home pay for a dentist:

Simple: No

For 1 dentist to see the volume of patients and offer the level of clinical care necessitated by a Super Solo model, an uncommon commitment to team training and clinical continuing education is paramount. This model may require you to split your patient base between productive and nonproductive exams. You might have some recall patients who only see the dentist for an exam once a year, if nothing is wrong: In this example, you would only perform the dental exam every other recall cycle. Complex practice mechanics like this add complexity to your practice but also enable you to do more dentistry by spending your time with patients with more complex needs. Communication and alignment between team members can break down without a commitment to constant and incremental improvement:

Sustainable: I'm skeptical

A portion of dentists are physically and psychologically built to be Super Solos. They’re immune to clinical stress. They’re uneasy unless they’re running 3 production columns and 132.
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

checking for multiple hygienists Most critically, they want large, profitable practices without "sharing the load" (and the "spoils") with another dentist, and they’re implicitly okay with the stresses of this arrangement.

Can this model be maintained for decades? For most of us, I would bet the answer is no, due to either the rigors of producing that much dentistry or of administering so large an operation without the scheduling flexibility afforded by having multiple dentists.

# Multidentist Practices

If you're looking to grow beyond the Productive Solo or Super Solo, to build a business underneath you on the entrepreneurial side where the practice is less dependent on you, then a multidentist practice is a great option: We call these group practices.

# Group Practices

|GROUP|PROFITABLE GROUP|MEGA GROUP|
|---|---|---|
|2 Dentists|2-3 Dentists|3+ Dentists|
|3-4 Hygienists|4+ Hygienists|6+ Hygienists|
|Office Manager|Office Manager|Large Staff|
|3-4 Front Office| | |
|Revenue: $1.6M-$2M|Revenue: $2M+|Revenue: $3.5M-$5M+|
---
# DENTAL MonEBALL

However; as with all practice styles, multidentist practices have their share of challenges. When performing a Solo to Group Transition, you will go through an ugly duckling phase where your profitability will be questionable and may require 6 to 9 months of patience while the profitability catches up to the newly incurred expenses. This is part of what is required to take your practice from 1 to 2 productive dentists.

If you want to go down this path, be prepared for a temporary drop in income. It’s worth it long term, but there is usually a financially tight period in the middle of the process. Over the years, we've gotten better about minimizing this drop with accurate timing of hires. We will walk through a Solo to Group Transition in Chapter 9.

Let’s look at group, Profitable Group, and Mega Group practices in more detail. Each of these multidentist practices employs more than 1 dentist and numerous auxiliary staff:

# Group Practice

The transition from Solo to Profitable Group is very profitable long term for the dentist; from both a net worth and a practice value/practice growth perspective. Refer back to Derek Green's case study in Chapter 2 to see a real-life example.

# Practice-Olk

There are 2 paths to becoming a group practice:

If you are a heavy producer, it's usually best that no dentist checks for more than 2 hygienists in your practice. When a dentist checks for 3 hygienists, in the majority of cases, the dentist pauses his/her focus on completing treatment 3 times per hour instead of 2, which can result in hindered dentist productivity without appropriate structure of the schedule and team support. Therefore, clinically productive dentists should bring on an associate at the same time as the third hygienist: We call this the Productive Per Patient Track.
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

is for those owners and practices that are very productive per patient; who aren't as reliant upon higher volumes of patient interactions to maintain appropriate production levels.

If you are not a heavy producer, you might need to temporarily check for 3 hygienists, then onboard the second dentist and a fourth hygienist at the same time. This method is designed to prevent the income drop for the practices that will have longer transitions to groups. We call this the Patient Flow Track because we need to wait for sufficient patient flow prior to hiring the second dentist:

# A group practice consists of the following:

- 2 dentists
- 3 or 4 assistants
- 3 or 4 hygienists
- A fully empowered and non-patient-facing office manager
- 2 or 3 front-office team members

The first (and often overlooked) challenge in this process will be getting the office manager in place. A true office manager; in our estimation, is not patient-facing: Just as a practice should be able to function at a basic level with or without the input of the owner dentist with a fully equipped office manager at the helm, so too should a practice be able to execute all key front-office functions without the direct involvement of an office manager.

When training and empowering your office manager, cultural challenges can ensue when elevating a team member: Someone who was previously on equal footing with every nondentist team member now runs part of the show. As the practice owner, you must navigate those cultural waters. However, with the office manager position requiring an elevated skillset, not all practices contain someone who is office manager material. When facing an external hire for office manager, a point of friction can develop in the practice just as readily as it might when elevating an existing team member: That person,
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

particularly when hired from without, must display humility, emotional intelligence, and strong communication skills in order for the transition to occur successfully:

Through the lens of PSS, a group practice traditionally scores as follows:

|Profitable:|Maybe|
|---|---|
|Adding a second dentist to a practice not yet producing $1,800,000 or more can yield mixed results in terms of profitability.| |
|A 2-dentist Profitable Group practice collecting more than $2,000,000 is far more likely to result in satisfactory profitability long term for the owner than a group practice collecting less than $1,800,000.| |
|It’s not guaranteed to be satisfactory for most dentists, particularly when compared to the profitability of a Productive Solo practice or that of a Profitable Group practice.| |

|Simple:|Maybe|
|---|---|
|Adding a dentist invariably introduces disorder into a practice when one considers scheduling preferences, standards of diagnosis, treatment philosophy, and the myriad other traits on which dentists historically differ:| |
|Dental practice operations are objectively more challenging for more dentists, which is why the financial and lifestyle benefits should correlate to the increased managerial challenges.| |
|More moving parts yields proportionately more personnel concerns than a Solo practice.| |
|You will also need to readjust processes to account for 2 dentists instead of 1, such as ordering supplies for 2 dentists, who may each prefer to use different burs, impression materials, etc.| |
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

Usually requires protocols and agreed-upon standards that were not needed before. Communication becomes challenging with 10+ team members.

# Sustainable: Maybe

A group practice that hasn't yet become a Profitable Group should only be a checkpoint, not a destination. Remaining an underperforming group practice in perpetuity would be a form of dental practice purgatory complete with the challenges of having a larger practice without many of the benefits.

# Profitable Group

A group practice most predictably turns into a Profitable Group once the fourth hygienist is in place. This is usually when we see a breakthrough in office profitability. Both dentists are able to be productive since they have a sufficient number of patients. The office manager oversees the team, which frees up the owner dentist, although the practice owner is ultimately in charge.

At this point, considering the roles of department leads is key: You should have a lead dental assistant and a hygiene lead. Again, it frees up time for the practice owner because team members are no longer coming to the owner dentist for help in addressing every issue. Issues are either addressed by the office manager, the lead dental assistant, or the hygiene lead. And that provides a lot of freedom and flexibility for the owner.

Profitable Group is when you've crossed the 81.8 million revenue threshold. The practice has a fully dedicated office manager, and the owner dentist typically works 3 or 4 days a week. This type of practice requires at least 6 treatment rooms, although 8 or more is ideal, and is open 5 days a week; Monday through Friday.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Through the lens of PSS, a Profitable Group practice traditionally scores as follows:

# Profitable: Yes

As revenue approaches and surpasses $2,000,000, the juice is worth the squeeze. The energy and effort to build and maintain a cohesive group practice is rewarded in terms of profitability and net-worth gain for the owner.

Take-home pay for the owner dentist is usually around $500,000 to $600,000.

# Simple: Yes

As with a group practice, a Profitable Group requires the addition of a dentist, which introduces disorder into a practice when one considers scheduling preferences, standards of diagnosis, treatment philosophy, and the myriad other traits on which dentists historically differ:

- With a dedicated office manager who possesses autonomous decision-making, business savvy, social intelligence, and leadership abilities, the practice can run with or without heavy input from the owner dentist.
- With lead front-office, assistant, and hygiene team members, decentralized decision-making can be the norm.
- With a defined cadence of team communication—weekly, monthly, and quarterly team meetings and training sessions—the team can ultimately become more self-governing.

# Sustainable: Yes

With this level of profitability, the owner has the ability to focus on rendering the treatment he/she sees fit, as the associate dentist.
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

can shoulder some of the load to produce, and refer out what helshe wishes.

A Profitable Group can effectively be run (if desired) as pods of 1 dentist checking for 2 hygienists, which simulates a Solo practice-level workload for each dentist.

Once dentists get to the Profitable Group stage and have been working that way for a while, they often want something more, something larger: That's where the Mega Group comes in.

# MegaGroup

A Mega Group is a practice with over $3 million in collections. This practice requires a third dentist and might employ 6 hygienists, an office manager, 4 front-office team members, and 6 assistants. That's a large team consisting of 20 people, which can be a lot of people to manage for a practice owner lacking the appropriate skillset.

When you move from a Profitable Group to a Mega Group, you will encounter learning curves that will need to be addressed. The biggest is learning to become a CEO. Now you're an owner-entrepreneur: When you were a Solo, YOU were primarily a technician. In a group practice, you were a technician and manager; so with the change in size comes different responsibilities.

In a Mega Group you spend time training a team, whether that's other dentists or staff members. And the training requirements increase significantly in proportion to the size of the group.

Now you're no longer a large reason why the practice is successful; it's due to your team. And your ability to build a winning team is what leads to that success. In the previous models, you could produce your way through problems, but in a Mega Group, everyone must be trained well to do things intentionally in the best interest of the practice.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Through the lens of PSS, a Mega Group practice traditionally scores as follows:

# Profitable: Yes

As revenue surpasses $3,000,000 in a 3-dentist practice, the profitability tends to make the administrative lift easier to bear: The energy and effort to build and maintain a cohesive Mega Group practice is rewarded in terms of profitability and net-worth gain for the owner. Take-home pay for the owner dentist, even if nonclinical, can exceed $500,000.

# Simple: Yes

As with a Profitable Group practice, a Mega Group requires sophistication when juggling scheduling preferences, standards of diagnosis, treatment philosophy, and the myriad other traits on which dentists historically differ: With a dedicated office manager who possesses autonomous decision-making, business savvy, social intelligence, and leadership abilities, the practice can run with or without heavy input from the owner dentist: With lead front-office, assistant, and hygiene team members decentralized decision-making can be the norm: With defined cadence of team weekly, a communication-monthly, and quarterly team meetings and training sessions the team can ultimately become more self-governing:

# Sustainable: Yes

In a Mega Group, the owner enjoys maximum customization of his/her schedule.
---
# PRACTICE AVATAR ROADMAP

Every recall cycle, the owner could expand or contract his/her clinical days preferences on procedure mix as well as his/her.

With this level of profitability, the owner has the ability to focus on rendering the treatment he/she sees fit, as the associate dentists can shoulder some of the load to produce, and refer out what he/she wishes.

# Where Are You and Where Do You Want to Go?

As I mentioned earlier; when I became a practice owner, I bought a Productive Solo thinking it was a group, and I made poor decisions based on that incorrect assumption. Once I realized that my practice was a Productive Solo and that it didn't have enough patients, even though my staff makeup was that of a group, I quickly understood the framework and how to address the issues I was experiencing:

I knew where I was. And I knew where I wanted to go. That's when everything made sense. And that's why it's important for you to know where you are and where you want to go. It will illuminate the direction in which you need to row every single day.

If you keep rowing with intention toward where you want to go, you will get there.

That moment of arriving is awesome, especially when you've been so focused on rowing for so long: Your schedule will be full, you will have a productive daily total, and your practice will function at a new level. All the rowing, all the work you put in.
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

togetthere, all the believing in yourself, will have been worth it. Your practice will be in a more stable place. And you will feel more fulfilled.

# Takeaways

1. Your practice style should be profitable, simple to execute, and sustainable to operate.
2. The first step to going anywhere is understanding where you are in the current moment.
3. The next step is understanding where you want to go.
4. Once you complete the above steps, the day path will highlight itself, and you must take the path to get where you want to go.

Now that you know how to self-classify where you are and where you want to go, it’s time to execute:
---
# CHAPTER 8

# TEAM INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXECUTION

In 2019, I was having dinner with a classmate from dental school, and we were talking about our practices. When I told him the things I was doing to try to grow mine, he said, "I'm not trying to grow my practice because I don't want to work harder than I already am." I didn't argue with him because I was trying to enjoy myself. I didn't want the conversation to turn confrontational, and I knew he just wanted to hang out and wasn't looking for advice. Plus, experience has shown me that those closest to you are those who listen to you the least, so anything I would say could potentially fall on deaf ears.

All that being said, I could not disagree more with the idea that growing your practice means working harder: Growth requires working smarter; which usually means working less hard. Thinking that you have to work harder to achieve practice growth is a very common misconception, one my dental school friend believed. But the truth is that my friend was working harder than me. He was writing his own lab orders, checking all of the assistant's work, and not delegating things clinically.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Sure, he was working harder; but he wasn't working on the right things. He wasn't putting his team in the right position to be successful. By doing everything himself; he was not positioning his practice for growth: When you commit to doing everything yourself; it makes it more challenging to grow your practice: Growth requires building a team who can work together every day - to accomplish more:

Growth is not hard and it’s not hard work. It’s different work. But to achieve success, you can't row the boat alone; you must row the boat as a team. Only then will you make tangible progress on a daily basis, leading your practice from where it is now to where you want it to go.

# Team-Led Growth

Let’s bring back the analogy from our Treatment Retention chapter about rolling a ball up the hill. In that chapter, we discussed that in order to get a patient to complete treatment, a lot of steps are involved. If the dentist alone is forced to do all the steps required to convert treatment, they will not be as productive as possible. By empowering their team to carry part of the load, dentists are able to increase their treatment retention.

Team-led growth works in a similar way to team-led case acceptance. There are a lot of steps required to grow your practice, many of which require the team's involvement: Without your team, you are the only one rowing your boat. Naturally, you won’t be able to make as much progress if you are the only one driving the growth. Similar to rolling the ball up the treatment-acceptance hill as a team, your practice will grow faster if you row your practice-growth boat as a team.
---
# TEAM INFRASTRUCTURE AND Execution

# Building Practice Infrastructure

In order to row your boat as a team, the team needs to be on the same page. Each team member needs to understand their role, where they fit; and how they are evaluated. For each thing that they do, there needs to be an agreed-upon strategy that leads to the outcome the practice is looking for. All of this necessitates what we call infrastructure.

# Onboarding and Niring

# Building Leaders

# Tranine Infrastructure

# Establishing Roles and Responsibilities

# Documenting Processes

Suzanne, our director of coaching, feels strongly that every person who reads this book needs to understand what the term infrastructure means. Your practice needs to serve the needs of its patient base; the foundation/organization by which your practice operates the daily tasks required is your practice infrastructure: Your vision is the driver of the direction of your practice. That direction decides what strategies you are going to use to get there. Your infrastructure is what allows those strategies to be executed.

145
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

If you want to shoot the Dental 3-Pointer, you need to develop some infrastructure that allows you to Retain, Open, and Fill - a consistent way of handling visits that allows for a Shared Practices level of patient retention:

Then you must have a way to add extra openings to your hygiene schedule. In order to actually benefit from the openings, they must be filled. The practice must have some regular daily tasks that fill the schedule:

All of these things require the practice to have developed consistent and intentional ways of handling the regular tasks required to operate a dental practice: This foundation that the practice is built on is the practice infrastructure.

Some practices have very little infrastructure: They depend on long-term, well-trained employees to do the regular tasks needed to operate a smooth dental practice. The issue with this strategy is when team members inevitably leave. There is no foundation for the replacement hire to fall back on to do things the same way.

Practice infrastructure includes all hiring processes, team training, clearly defined roles/responsibilities, leadership team, and whatever else you use to manage your practice operations.

Often during our philosophy, we need to hire new team members in advance of an increase in patient flow so we can have sufficient time for training and calibration. In order to be able to deal with the inevitable turnover that practices experience, standard operating procedures (SOPs) are needed for the practice's regular operating activities. These are also known as systems or strategies. These standardized protocols are used to train new team members on the practice's preferred way of doing things.

Infrastructure also creates a foundation by which your practice operates. This stabilizes the regular daily tasks each team member completes. For example, it could be as simple as using a template for setting up a room for a specific procedure: Without this piece of infrastructure, you are dependent.
---
# TEAM INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXECUTION

On the team member to remember exactly what you need to complete each clinical procedure. With an extra layer of organization, any team member should be able to set up operatories for any procedure. This adds a layer of stability and organization to the practice.

Spending time putting all of these structures in place to more effectively manage your team allows your team to row your rowboat with you. This is one of those rare things that you will spend a lot of time doing once, then you will be thankful your practice operations will be more consistent:

# Delegation

The people rowing the boat should not be in charge of the direction. Someone should be instructing them on how to guide the ship in the correct direction. In a dental practice, that is the owner dentist.

When dentists delegate to others who are capable of performing specific tasks, it enables the dentist to expand their capacity. This expanded capacity could be used to perform higher-level management tasks or produce large amounts of clinical dentistry.

Dentists are generally awful delegators, especially when it comes to clinical items. They have a difficult time accepting others' work because, as dentists, we are taught to be perfectionists.

It is difficult for dentists to delegate when they don't feel their staff can perform at the dentist's level. But it's important to recognize that 'good enough' from someone else is better than perfect from you.

When a process shift occurs from the dentist doing everything perfectly to the staff adhering to a guideline of instruction regarding how to do acceptable work, the dentist can provide feedback for improvement.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

than taking over things and doing it themselves. The dentist can surrender perfection and acquire acceptance.

Delegating regular daily tasks enables you to build value in your practice. It frees you up to work on the parts of the practice that impact the bottom line: It allows you to guide the boat and to focus on ways to improve the practice moving forward.

# Why > What > How

I’ve stated many times throughout this book that daily decision-making is what leads to the biggest outcomes long term. On a day-to-day basis, you will be faced with decisions that might seem small but add up over time. How you schedule patients, who you hire, and what processes your team uses are all daily decisions that lead to long-term outcomes. Use this framework as a way of guiding those daily decisions toward your long-term goals.

# Why: Start with Why

Why are we making the change? Why always goes back to vision. Anytime you are making a daily decision, your process must start with your vision in mind. If you can explain clearly why this action is in the best interest of your long-term vision, proceed on to what.

# What: What should my staff be doing?

This is the next step. Once you have validated that a change is needed, you must then identify what the desired outcome of that change is. What metric increase or direct result am I looking for? Once you have identified what exactly you’d like to see, then you are ready to focus on how to do it.

# How: This is where most industry standard checklists come in

Keep in mind that how you do something is important but not nearly as important as you might think. Doing the wrong thing the right way doesn't matter: If you work on the wrong thing focusing on a checklist system that addresses a part of your practice that does not require improvement, you’re wasting time.
---
# TEAM INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXECUTION

You do something is only important after you know it's worth doing: That is why it is important to first address why and what: Once you have done those things, the how will usually present itself. Whatever strategy or structure you implement should be tailored to the result you are trying to achieve.

# Singular Focus per Department

Each department can only focus on 1 thing at a time, which will usually be what that department does the worst: Those are commonly where we find the biggest bottlenecks. Focusing on more than 1 thing at a time will not allow the team the opportunity to master important habits. By focusing on 1 thing per department at one time, we are able to focus on creating long-term changes in team performance: Once we have mastered a new skill, we monitor it monthly and move on to the next one.

Use metrics to create a comprehensive look at the practices holding it back from growth: Once you understand the bottlenecks that are, identify bottlenecks, prioritize them by department so you know what's most important to focus on now and what can be saved for later.

Having a singular focus per department enables you to address the how in a way that adds value. Selecting which things you focus on per department requires you to be clear on your why and what changes are the most important to work on right now.

Knowing why you're doing something helps you head in the right direction toward your vision: Knowing what to do helps you spend your time on the things that move the needle for you.

149
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Knowing how to do things helps your team build long-term habits that drive the results you are looking for:

# Feedback Loop

Align

Repeat Feedback Loop

Execute

Re-address Assess

# The feedback loop consists of the following:

- Aligning your direction by assessing how each department is doing what they are currently focused on.
- Once a department has gained a new skill and has done something well; maintaining what they have done well previously.
---
# TEAM INFRASTRUCTURE AND Execution

On a monthly basis, you must look at the practice's performance in depth to ensure it is going well: You can then add 1 new thing to focus on each month (or every next 3 months however long it takes your staff to adopt new skills). Examples of these new skills in hygiene could be reappointing patients in hygiene more than 90 percent of the time or consistently using intraoral cameras to co-diagnose as a team using clinical protocols. Once new skills and procedures are in place, you continue to maintain and monitor them as you add new ones to the practice.

The feedback is like a repetitive cycle of rowing: When you keep rowing and stack many good decisions on top of one another by improving the processes and protocols, it builds value into the practice and leads to growth: It starts with knowing why you are doing things. Then knowing specifically what to do. Then working with your team on how to get the results you are looking for: If you keep repeating this cycle, if you keep rowing together as a team, you will achieve the growth you desire: The only question becomes how long it will take:

# Review Metrics

This may seem obvious at this point in the book, but it's important to regularly monitor your practice's key performance indicators (KPIs). Everyone has a different cadence for checking their metrics. Some things are looked at daily, others monthly, and some quarterly: I'd recommend monitoring your daily production and value added daily, which goes back to the dinner table analogy: I generally like to be aware on a daily basis of how much I am adding to the schedule as it relates to how much I produced that day. Dentists are usually aware of their production totals on a daily basis, but being aware of how much treatment you scheduled forward should be looked at as a part of that daily check.
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

Monthly is where I think it is best to do a practice overview. Each practice is working on different things and is different. Some people check a list of metrics every month; others choose to prioritize a singular focus that each department is working on. I spend some time exploring last month's metrics at the beginning of each month. Making it a habit is what is important because the metrics you look at will evolve. By looking at these metrics, you will begin to be more in tune with what is happening in your practice. You will start noticing new things that you saw first in the data, then in the daily flow of operating the dental practice.

Quarterly is when I think it is a good idea to do a complete practice assessment: I would start by looking at your profitability in depth. With the monthly ups and downs in practice collections and expenses, quarterly financial statements allow for a more stable look at the practice. This is where those overhead percentages are more reliable and can be used to improve your operation. After looking through office profitability, I’d take a thorough look through the various components of the dental practice. Use the practice flowchart in this book as your guide. Pick apart of the office, then start diving into the numbers.

Each set of metrics will provide information about a specific component of the practice. Look back at the section on case-acceptance metrics in this book as an example of how to assess a part of your practice using data. In that section, you will see a deep dive into the metrics used to assess a practice's treatment retention. At first, there will likely be a learning curve, but after a while, it will become natural to you. You will do your regular checks easily and will feel confident knowing you are doing the right things for your practice at any given moment. It will lead to a sense of ease and allow you to relax.

152
---
# TEAM INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXECUTION

# Celebrate the Wins!

I remember when I first started working with Matt Guarino, he would hold me accountable to celebrate the small wins along the journey: Anytime we hit a new revenue threshold or achieved some milestone, he made sure I rewarded myself. If I did not reward myself sufficiently, he would encourage me to treat myself more next time.

This is an important part of the journey. Owning and operating a dental office is an infinite game. For many, it is their whole working career: There are no natural stopping points that allow for reflection. If you do not stop to recognize the progress you have made, you may never appreciate the success you have had.

Our brains are wired to want rewards. By rewarding yourself along the way, it allows for the whole journey to be more enjoyable. Every once in a while, stop and appreciate how far you’ve come.

I would suggest doing this as a team; we do it as part of our coaching program: Every once in a while, we will take a break to look back to see how far we've come. Team members are often energized by the progress they have made and are encouraged to go for more.

Celebrating the wins along the way makes the journey of practice growth rewarding for both you and your team.

# Takeaways

1. Long-term growth requires you to row your boat every day as a team.
2. Delegate operations so that you can focus on building value in the practice long term.
3. Make decisions by first considering why; then the what by department, and finally focus on the how.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# 4. Keep a Singular focus per department

Audit and monitor all your metrics monthly to ensure old processes have not relapsed: Keep repeating this cycle; and you will get to where you desire to go.

156
---
# CHAPTER 9

# CASE STUDIES

At this point, we’ve covered a lot of material. I told you this book was dense; now you see what I mean. At the beginning of the book, you learned why the old way of making decisions by following the industry standard does not unlock practice growth and that the best way to do so is by following an analytics-based process where a practice is looked at like a combination of its components of inputs and outputs, which you tweak to achieve the desired result.

I want you to finish this book knowing that practice growth is possible and how to achieve it: In the final chapter, I’ll focus on walking a dental practice through the stages of growth from the average dental practice all the way to a Mega Group. I’ll do this by walking through the different types of transformations a practice goes through as it grows.

Let’s start with the average dental practice: In my opinion, the average in dentistry is a testament to how dentists run businesses. The average dental practice collects $675,000 per year, which means half of the practices, all solo practices, collect less. I can't wrap my mind around how half of all dentists in the United States collect less than $675,000 per year.

Shared Practices feels strongly about redefining the average. Currently, big groups are consolidating the industry because the average is so low that dentists are better off working for a corporation than for themselves.
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

In my opinion, one way to help preserve private practice in our industry is by increasing the average private dental office collections.

The first of the 3 transformations we'll focus on is the Solo to Productive Solo Transformation. We will then walk you through a Solo to Group Transition. The final transformation will be showing how to turn a group into a Mega Group.

You don't need to read all the types of transformations; now that you've identified your practice type, start there. Where are you at now? And where do you want to go?

# Solo to Productive Solo Practice

The typical Solo practice has $675,000 in collections per year, which is about average, as we've already discussed. It employs 1 hygienist, 1 dental assistant, and 1 front-office team member. Including the dental owner, that makes a team of 4.

# Phase 1

What we know is that we have to double the number of patients in the practice to become a Productive Solo. That is how our philosophy works. We must use the Dental 3-Pointer as a means to grow the practice. Retain: Open. Fill. (ROF). In seminars, we call opening and filling the hygiene schedule Strategic Hygiene Openings.

This practice must first go from having a single hygienist who works 4 days a week to hiring a second part-time hygienist who works 2 days a week. Usually, this second hygienist will pre-agree to add the other 2 days in 6 to 12 months.

So, how does this practice fill those openings?
---
# CASE Studies

# Retain Qpen Fill

The first step in shooting the Dental 3-Pointer is to focus on retention, both proactive and reactive. Proactive retention involves booking the patients' next appointments while they are in the office. Reactive retention involves calling patients who are overdue for appointments and getting them to fill the new openings.

The combination of new and reactivated patients should be able to fill the additional hygienist appointments that are created by adding the second part-time hygienist to the practice. If the practice opened 2 additional days to hygiene appointments—that's 16 slots, 8 slots per day—and it fills 50 to 67 percent of those slots, the practice has opened the appropriate number of appointments. Having some excess openings ensures we have capacity for all available demand. This may sound counterintuitive, but we do not want hygiene openings filled every one of the.

Now that the practice is seeing more patients, the most important thing is to retain them. If the practice reappoints 90-plus percent of those patients, it builds long-term value in the practice because the patients will continue to come back for recurring appointments. As you learned, recurring recare visits offer financial stability.

Because hygiene has a 6-month recare clock, do not expand days any further until the initial 6-month period has ended. In this example, the Solo practice should remain at 6 hygiene days for 6 months before moving to 8 hygiene days.

When I first started trying this out in my practice, I added 2 hygiene days a week and the schedule was packed. That’s because we did a good job reactivating patients and scheduling more new patients. Because the schedule was so booked, I added a third day and then a fourth; all before the 6-month clock hit: So, the hygienist went from working 2 to 4 days a week.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

by

problem:

her fifth month in the practice. That created a we ended up not having enough patients to reactivate to fill up her schedule when she went full-time. There were days where she was there with only 1 or 2 patients on the schedule. This led to the hygienist having an uneven number of patients in the 6-month recare cycle. She had a busy 3 months; then a slow 3 months; with this cycle repeating every 6 months. This uneven patient-flow pattern persisted for years. It taught me a valuable lesson: do not open the schedule too quickly.

It had all seemed great until our reactivation pool dried up. Reactivation consists of a finite number of available patients, and it's very hard to book beyond that: When you open up days, you must stretch those patients over the next 6 months to truly see where your practice stands. That's why it’s important to only open up 2 days at a time for 6 months if you are planning to fill those openings with reactivated patients.

If the practice is expanding and has a greater than 70 percent fill rate for those appointments, and with primarily new patients, you can open additional slots, betting on new patients to fill those openings, knowing your recare pool is finite.

# Phase 2

After we shoot the Dental 3-Pointer; by focusing on ROF in Phase 1, we are beginning Phase 2. This is where we focus on the practice's management infrastructure.

Once the practice opens 2 additional hygiene days retaining patients and is to the Shared Practices standard, there is a 6-month latent period before growth compounds. The practice is now reappointing more patients, and once those patients come back, growth will compound. By opening up hygiene days and improving retention, the practice drastically increased the number of hygiene patients retained. We showed this math in the Patient 158.
---
# CASE Studies

Flow section: The practice is going to have much more production already changes. Therefore, the practice big on the books 6 months from those gets a bump after those initial 6 months are over.

Remember, double your hygiene; double your practice: In the future, the practice is going to have more hygiene patients walking in every day. If the practice has twice as many patients walking through the front door every day, it has twice as many patient insurances to verify, has twice as many patients to check out, and will need to have more efficient ways of handling patients. This is why we use this 6-month waiting period to improve the way the practice operates. At the end of Phase 2, the practice will need to be ready for a higher volume of patient flow.

Phase 2 is where we focus on building the team and processes needed to service the upcoming new demand. Using a proactive approach, we can anticipate needing to improve our front-desk processes to accommodate for more patients.

In order to accommodate patient growth, this Solo practice must grow to include 2 dental assistants, 2 hygienists, and 2 front-desk team members. However, that leads to what we call 1-to-2 troubles, which are common miscommunications that happen when a team is doubling the number of employees at each position.

When switching from having 1 front-desk team member to 2, it's important to specialize each person's functions (one is a treatment coordinator and the other a patient-care coordinator). Otherwise, neither person will be accountable for what needs to be done. If you don't specialize functions, no one knows who should answer the phones, who should check in patients, or who deals with patients that need to discuss the cost of treatment.

In addition, the dental assistants must learn how to work together and do things in a consistent manner. If they do not work effectively as a team, it...
---
# DENTAL MONEyBALL

will create constant conflict regarding the assignment of shared duties and that in turn leads to cultural issues within the practice:

We like to use Phase 2 to set up clear roles/responsibilities between team members and ensure the practice is prepared for twice as many patients to walk in everyday:

# Phase 3

At this point in the process, we have passed the 6-month mark since we made significant changes to the practice. Six months ago, the practice improved its retention drastically and opened up days in hygiene. The result 6 months later is usually an increase in patient flow:

Not only does the practice now have more existing patients coming in than normal, but it will still see the normal monthly number of new patients. This may eliminate excess openings in the hygiene schedule:

In this phase, it's necessary to evaluate where the practice stands. If there is no more breathing room in the hygiene schedule, add 2 additional days to the hygiene schedule, for a total of 8, with everyone working full-time 4 days a week. This is the most common scenario when the other phases have gone well. If Phase 1 and Phase 2 were handled properly, we should be opening up more days after a 3-to 6-month stabilization period in Phase 3.

Once those 2 last days get filled up, it will result in double the number of hygiene patients from when we started. Double the patient flow; double the revenue:

Now our average practice has doubled as a result of doubling patient flow and has moved from a Solo to a Productive Solo practice: I hope going through this transformation provided more clarity in the real-life application of the Dental 3-Pointer; ROF. The ease of this transformation is why we advocate against staying in the Solo avatar long term: It makes a lot of sense to grow into a Productive Solo.
---
# CASE STUDIES

# Finishing Touches

Now that our example dentist has achieved their practice goals in terms of patient flow, they can work with their team on retaining treatment: The clinical team can learn to diagnose as a team (hygienists plus dentist). The treatment coordinator has more time available and can follow up with unscheduled treatment. And the scheduling coordinator can actively work on making calls to overdue recare patients to get them back into the office.

At this level of practice, there will be a big increase in collections, and it usually happens all at once. In Phase 2, a practice may have grown 20 to 40 percent; but in Phase 3, the practice will experience an 80 to 90 percent growth as it fills up all the added hygiene days:

As you can see, the typical Solo practice started with 4 hygiene days and ended as a Productive Solo with 8 hygiene days: The practice owner has increased take-home pay, which is the biggest benefit to the dentist. In addition, the practice owner hopefully experiences less stress than as a Solo because it contains additional team members who are organized, and the owner can devote time to management.

When working to move a practice from a Solo to Productive Solo, understand that some practices take until the second full recare cycle to achieve this goal. Patient flow dictates speed; so the number of patients available to reactivate will determine how quickly the hygienists' schedules are filled. As long as team members are in place and working on filling the openings in the hygiene schedule, the practice will eventually achieve its goal of becoming a Productive Solo.

Now that you understand how to grow a practice from a Solo to a Productive Solo, let’s look at how to grow from a Productive Solo to a group. We call this a Solo to Group Transition; you will see the extra complexity in this transformation.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

# Productive Solo to Group Practice

The chief complaint we hear from dentists who have been working as a Productive Solo for 5 to 10 years is that they are experiencing burnout: They say, "Man, every single expense in this practice, every single dollar generated, every single patient that's seen, and every single procedure that's done, is done by me."

That's when dentists begin to become attracted to the idea of building a business beneath themselves and evolving into a practice that doesn't need them and can still make money when they're not working. However, building this practice requires another dentist.

If there is one thing I want Shared Practices to be known for, it is Solo to Group Transitions. These are really enjoyable processes to do with clients and create a lasting change in their lives. Solo to Group Transitions are particularly challenging because no two are the same. Each transition requires a unique timeline and plan to get it done. Many of our real case studies illustrate clients who have either done a Solo to Group Transition or who will be doing one in the future. This is a very popular desire for the dentists we work with.

Adding an additional dentist to the practice is a major transformation. It's more difficult to integrate a second dentist into a practice than it is to integrate any other position, due to all the components that come with it. With a second dentist, you usually need a minimum of 6 operatories to support 2 dentists and the proper number of hygienists. This process will require many changes to core processes in the practice such as hygiene exams, ordering supplies, and scheduling for treatment on the dentist side.

From a leadership perspective, going into a Solo to Group Transition will change the practice functionality. Everything that is dependent on the owner dentist will break because you're replacing yourself, someone who's highly skilled.
---
# CASE STUDIES

experienced and who has been working hard, with someone who is inexperienced and new to the practice. And rarely is an associate put in a position to be successful from a first-time group practice owner: This transition from 1 to 2 dentists is the biggest challenge the practice will face in any of the stages of growth:

For example, if the owner dentist is a great diagnoser and salesperson and can get patients to accept a lot of treatment; that process needs to be transformed to being a team-led performance so that when you slide the new associate into the practice, they get the same results. When you double the number of dentists and patients, success needs to be because of process, not individual team members.

When doing a Solo to Group Transition, anything that is dependent on the owner dentist will be exposed. When an associate replaces the owner; the gaps in your practice infrastructure will become evident. Practice owners must adapt their practices to function consistently regardless of which dentist is performing the exam or procedure:

To double the number of dentists, you must also double the number of patients coming in every day: That requires Retain, Open, Fill, which we discussed when looking at Solo to Productive Solo practices.

# Two Tracks

A practice can take 2 tracks when moving from a Productive Solo to a Profitable Group practice: To decide which track to take, you must first determine how long the transition will take. If doubling the number of patients in the practice will happen quickly, take the Productive Per Patient Track and get the associate on board quickly. If it will take a long time to double the number of patients in the practice, take the Patient Flow Track, and wait to get the associate until the practice has the number of patients it needs.
---
# DENTAL MoNEyBALL

# Productive Per Patient Track

In this fast track, the practice hires an office manager; a third hygienist, and an additional dentist, in close succession: The office manager is hired first and fully onboarded and functioning in the role before the other hires are made. Once the office manager is in place, the associate dentist and the third hygienist are hired at roughly the same time: Hiring the office manager before the associate and third hygienist is important because when the associate dentist and hygienist come on board, it generates additional administrative work. For example, the associate dentist must receive clear expectations regarding their daily production and how their pay is calculated. This adds an extra layer of administrative work that needs to be done on a semi-regular basis. And employees must be managed so that problems are addressed promptly and don't escalate: Having the office manager in place ensures the process occurs as smoothly as possible when growing the team.

# Patient Flow Track

In this track; the third hygienist is hired without the associate. The owner dentist temporarily checks for 3 hygienists, which is tough: We recommend this because the practice would suffer financially due to inadequate patient flow if it added an associate too soon: Although not ideal, the benefits of checking for 3 hygienists outweigh the negatives. It's important to avoid at all costs getting an associate dentist who is not busy. An associate who is not busy weighs on the practice financially: It also makes the associate frustrated; which can create turnover and stress for everyone involved. It's better for the owner dentist to be a little booked out and overwhelmed than to have an associate complaining that there are not enough patients to keep them busy: Once the practice has enough patients to support additional staff (when the third hygienist is working full-time), an associate and a part-time fourth hygienist are hired at the same time. Now there are enough patients for both dentists to be productive.
---
# CASE STUDIES

Let's review the phases for a Solo to Group Transition and how they apply to both tracks.

# Phase 1

In this phase, the first thing you need to determine is which track the practice is taking. This will dictate the timing of the entire Solo to Group Transition:

Next, hire an office manager and ensure the person is onboarded and functioning in the position. Phase 1 ends when the practice has a fully empowered office manager and hires its third hygienist. In this phase, the practice will also Retain, Open, and Fill in the same way that it did from the Solo to Productive Solo Transition. The fundamentals discussed in that case study still apply to Solo to Group Transitions.

# Phase 2

Hiring a third hygienist starts Phase 2. Remember from the last transformation, Phase 2 is where we work on the practice's management infrastructure. Depending on the track the practice is taking, another dentist may or may not be hired at the same time as the hygienist. During this phase, the lead hygienist trains the new hygienist, and the entire team works on standardizing processes.

Remember, complexity increases drastically when moving from one to two dentists because they each diagnose differently and perform different procedures. The hygiene team must be trained to know which dentist to get what exams and what types of treatment options to discuss with patients.

Phase 2 is where the leadership team is put in place. This consists of an office manager, a lead hygienist, and a lead assistant. Bi-weekly meetings with the leadership team, consisting of leads in each department, are necessary to discuss issues and create solutions so that issues are resolved quickly. This prevents long-term issues from boiling over due to a lack of communication. When a practice is growing, the team dynamics change. As the team grows, culture problems come up more often.
---
# DENTAL MonEyBALL

together will create more drama, conflict, and chaos among team members leadership and you begin to settle into having a larger team.

# Phase 2

Phase 2 is when your grows.

# Phase 3

In a Solo to Group Transition, this phase begins with the hiring of a fourth hygienist: If a dentist is in the Patient Flow Track, this is when they also hire an associate dentist. Once the associate is hired, the owner will be able to drop the clinical days worked from 4 to 3 days a week, with an additional half day dedicated to management items, paperwork, and meetings.

Patient flow is ramped up through the same methods we have already discussed. The practice becomes very profitable once the fourth hygienist is over 50 percent full. Once the practice becomes a full-fledged Profitable Group, it usually has a large effect on the owner: The owner dentist will settle into running the business by overseeing the leadership team, which includes department heads, assistant lead, hygiene lead, and office manager. The owner dentist will also need to meet regularly with the associate to monitor their treatment and to help them grow. Building cohesion within the team and solidifying long-term players is important as well.

At this point in a practice's growth, the owner has built the tough infrastructure and put protocols in place. It's been a 12-month grind to get here, but it worked! And that feeling is euphoric.

The owner dentist's quality of life has improved greatly. They usually are not working as much clinically and are making more money: As we mentioned before, Profitable Group is our second avatar that we feel is profitable, simple, and sustainable long term.

Once a dentist reaches this point of growth in a practice, it's easier to move forward. More times than not, after a Solo to Group Transition, our clients have been electing to further grow their practices. Many of our real case.
---
# CASE Studies

Studies are living examples of clients pushing past the Profitable Group: Whether that means moving their location or expanding, growing past a Profitable Group is not nearly as hard as it is to get to a Profitable Group. There is already a leadership team in place, solid protocols, and a strong leader: The practice has been tailored to multiple dentists. Further growth requires steady patient-flow growth with the strategic addition of providers. That's where the Mega Group practice comes in: Before we discuss getting to the Mega Group, let's discuss our next real case study.

# Real Case Study - Super Solo to Profitable Group Transition

The next case study will be a deep dive into a unique Super Solo to Profitable Group Transition using Nathaniel Dockstader's journey. Nate is a 2016 grad who served 4 years in the navy. Right after his time in the navy, Nate started a residency: Halfway through the residency, Nate purchased a large practice that had a Super Solo seller and an unproductive associate. He had to transition the practice to be more of a traditional Profitable Group that was not so dependent on one heavy producer.

The funny thing about this case study is that 6 months before Nate purchased this office, I was trying to buy the exact same office. After I put down the handpiece, I wanted to acquire another group practice in my area. In June of 2020, I submitted a $3.9 million offer for both Nate's practice and the building: The seller declined. I couldn't get my lending partner to go any higher, and the seller decided to move on. Ultimately Nate ended up buying the practice: When I was telling Nate this story, he commented on how thankful he was that my deal fell through, and we had a good laugh about it. Funny how things work out sometimes.

This very unique practice is near my first office. It has an unbeatable location at the corner of a busy intersection, which has super memorable Christmas.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

Lights every year: People call it the Christmas light dental office: figured they must have unbelievable patient flow. I was really attracted to the idea of retaining all those new patients long term. At the time I was looking at it, the practice had 6 operatories and room to expand, so I wanted to buy the building and make it a 12 operatory Mega Group: It was funny talking through my vision for the practice with Nate, who ended up taking it in a similar direction.

Nate bought the practice in December of 2020, 6 months after my deal fell through: The practice had historically collected around $2.2 million per year: In this case study, we will set the benchmark at $2.2 million:

One of the comments Nate made to me was how hard it was to get a loan for this office: The purchase price was around $2 million, which is past the limit for a lot of banks. Another comment Nate made on our phone call was about how painful a large-note payment can feel each month: It eats up a good portion of his income and will continue to for the first 10 years of ownership.

This is part of the reason why our philosophy on the ideal acquisition size has shifted to be more in favor of 'ready to grow' practice that is underperforming:

The interesting part about this practice, which for me was a big red flag during my due diligence, was how much the seller produced. I found out from Nate that the seller would restrict hygiene and focus on full mouth reconstructions. The seller's production was an unusually large percentage of the practice's overall production. One of my main concerns as a buyer was around how to replace the seller's production once he leaves. I asked Nate how he was able to grow this practice despite losing a seller who was producing at a Super Solo level.

Nate talked about how he knew going into the acquisition that he would have to change the practice style. He said he talked to Suzanne before he bought it and formed a game plan: He mentioned on our call that had he not created.
---
# CASE Studies

A plan with Suzanne prior, he wouldn’t have felt comfortable moving forward with the practice purchase: His inability to replace the seller's production was a big fear he had prior to purchasing the practice. Despite losing a lot of production from his seller, who stayed for only 3 months, Nate grew the practice in both of the years he has owned it: His collections his first year were $2.53 million, and the second year was $2.56 million. This amounts to 16 percent growth when comparing it to the historical benchmark.

Nate was able to absorb a large drop in production and still grow the practice by increasing the amount of hygiene being done in the office. He increased the number of hygiene days from 13 to 18 days per week. By opening up the hygiene schedule, he was able to significantly increase his new-patient flow. Nate sees about 25 percent more new patients than the seller historically saw. Even though their production per patient went down, their overall revenue grew due to the increase in patient flow. The office evolved from being dependent on large cases to reach its goals to doing it in a more sustainable, patient-flow-driven way.

Nate expanded the office from 6 to 7 operatories shortly after buying it and will be expanding the space to fit 9 operatories in the near future. He plans to bring on an additional associate and cut his clinical days back to 2 days a week. After he has 10 doctor days, between 3 dentists, he says he is done trying to grow the practice by increasing patient flow. He then wants to cut low-paying insurances and keep growing his revenue without increasing his patient flow. Nate would like to stay in the Profitable Group avatar long term; although he will grow fairly close to what we would consider a Mega Group.

169
---
# DENTALMONEYBALL

As you can see from Nate's real-life example, real-life applications of our philosophy always look a little different than the generalized transformations we are outlining in this chapter: The transformations are made to apply to any situation, knowing that in real life, there is always an extra layer of nuance: Here is what Nate had to say about his journey in his own words.

I've been listening to SP since the first season. I've learned so much over the years and can't imagine where I'd be without it. I purchased my practice in 2020 and started coaching at the same time. My coach has helped me navigate through so many difficult situations. It's invaluable having her perspective of being a team member. I truly appreciate her regular meetings with my OM to help us fulfill my vision. My practice is so different from when I purchased it. It's much more sustainable, and our revenue floor is 20 percent higher in a practice that was already performing very well and near capacity.

In Nate's case, he does not want to proceed toward a Mega Group. For some of our other clients, once they have a taste of growing into a Profitable Group, they set their sights on the Mega Group. This is the case for Amanda Remer-Chang and Derek Green, as well as our final case study, Todd Haskin.

# Group to Mega Group Practice

A Mega Group practice is any practice that has 3 or more dentists and collects over $3 million a year: This is where the complexity of operations ramps up, and it requires the right type of owner: These practices are long-term projects, they take years to build, and they are usually built to last: I'd like to emphasize that this is for a certain type of owner; one who wants to mainly deal with management stress as opposed to clinical stress.

The most important thing to start with is the owner dentists' vision:
---
# CASE Studies

Mega Groups come in different shapes and sizes; it's important for the practice owner to ask themselves the following questions:

- Do I want a personal practice style that is high volume with simple procedures or lower volume with more complex treatment?
- How many days a week clinically do I want to work?
- What types of procedures do I enjoy doing?

Keeping in mind that income rises in proportion to the number of clinical days worked. My recommendation is for owners to work 1 to 3 days clinically, depending on preference: Mega Group practice owners can tailor their schedule toward their clinical interests. Mega Groups usually have at least 3,000 patients, which is enough to filter treatment to the owner based on their clinical preferences:

Now that you know how many days you want to work; you need to evaluate your current staff size and facility: Ask yourself these questions:

- How many associates do I have?
- How many operatories do I have?
- How many hygienists do I have?

Next, look at the practice you desire to create, keeping in mind the type of Mega Group you want; and ask yourself the following:

- What type of facility do I need?
- How many parking spaces does the facility need?
- How many associates do I need?
- How many operatories do I need?
- How many hygienists do I need?
- How do I plan to retain associates?
- Most importantly, how many new patients do I need to keep this practice alive?
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

The key to keeping a Mega Group profitable is new-patient flow. The practice must have 40-50 new patients per month for every full-time dentist it employs. If it’s 3 full-time dentists, it means adding 120-150 new patients each month. Not meeting this patient-flow quota causes the practice to become a liability over time because profits will decline as patients leave the practice.

As you can see, the transition from group to Mega Group isn't any different than the transition from Productive Solo to group practice; it just occurs on a greater level.

# Associate Retention Strategy

It’s important to address associate retention strategy, especially in Mega Groups. If you’re okay with associate turnover, you don't need to offer equity or any sweeteners. But if you’re not okay with turnover; such as those working in rural locations where it’s difficult to get associates, you may need to have a partnership or minority partnership conversation with the associates as part of your retention strategy.

# Compounding Cycles over Time

With a clear vision and a path to get there, the process of growing into a Mega Group consists of 6-month compounding recare cycles over time. It requires adding providers in an order that makes sense to get to the desired size of the practice while building and tweaking processes with the practice's vision in mind to prevent breakdowns.

Here’s an example of how compounding works: If a practice expands their hygiene schedule, creating additional openings, it provides the opportunity to fill the schedule with extra patients the practice wouldn’t have seen otherwise. If a practice is able to achieve a Shared Practices level of retention, the patient base size increases every 6 months. Having retained well, the practice will need to keep adding additional hygiene openings to the.
---
# CASE Studies

Our process is a predictable way to consistently grow your patient base over time. This momentum builds and compounds every 6 months, similar to how compounding interest works in finance. As long as more patients are retained than are lost, the compounding effect will increase the number of patients the practice sees every 6 months. The next 6 months will always be better than the prior 6.

Once the practice's patient base has compounded over 3 to 5 recare cycles, you can really see the effectiveness of this process. Our early clients are getting there, and it is really cool to see the types of life-changing outcomes they are experiencing.

To get to a Mega Group, it requires a lot of time to allow for the patient base to grow to the adequate size. When dentists aspire for this type of practice, I make sure to communicate that this is a 3-5 year project. It takes several 6-month recare cycles to grow a patient base to the proper size to support a Mega Group.

# Real Case Study: Todd Haskin's Unique Mega Group

I’d like to introduce our final case study, Dr. Todd Haskin. Todd was Richard's college roommate and was the first client to try out our coaching. He started working with Dr. Matt Guarino when we started with dentist coaching in 2019 as he was buying his practice. He then transitioned to our coaching department in 2021.

Todd's practice is in rural Alaska, which presented many challenges as he was trying to grow. His patient population is transient due to being located near a military base. This has made long-term patient retention near impossible, due to patients moving every 3 years. I want to show how even in a situation where it was impossible to retain patients to the Shared Practices standard, Todd was still able to grow into a Mega Group.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

In this case study, you will also see the real-life challenges created by not having strong patient retention:

When Todd purchased his practice, it had roughly 5 operatories and historically collected around $1,300,000. Todd eventually decided to pursue a $3 million office: He added an additional 5 operatories and now has 10 total treatment rooms with the ability to add 2 more. In 2022, Todd's practice collected over $3 million; which was a number Todd had been chasing for a long time.

Todd's retention has improved drastically since he began working with us, but he still has not been able to retain patients at the level we commonly expect from clients. Even with this challenge, Todd was able to reach his MegaGroup goal by increasing the size of his patient base. His lack of long-term retention requires his practice to be more dependent on new patients than a traditional Mega Group: They must constantly replace the patients who are moving away from the area. His practice also requires more dentist production than the typical Mega Group, as it lacks a strong hygiene backbone.

Another trade-off Todd has noticed is that his revenue is much less consistent month over month without the large recare pool: His practice is more driven by same-day dentistry, which can make monthly collections numbers volatile.

Todd mentioned he wishes he had considered the impact of the practice location on the operations of a Mega Group long term. He is envious of other clients who have more recare-driven practices that offer more stability: He also has a hard time attracting dentists and staff members due to his location, which makes the management of a Mega Group more challenging.

When I called Todd to explain that we were using him for the case study, the conversation turned in a direction I did not expect: I reached out to Todd because I wanted to illustrate the impact of time on growth: Todd was our first client and has been using an analytics-based philosophy the longest.
---
# CASE STUDIES

Todd, after reaching his big personal goal of a $3 million collection year, suffered a mini-midlife crisis. He and I talked about it when I called him to discuss his case study in the book. Todd was nice enough to be willing to share his thought process with our readers.

Todd started by stating that our philosophy works on being able to grow any practice. In his words, "The philosophy works; there is no doubt about that." I would hope that is pretty clear at this point in the book.

Todd followed that comment by asking, "Now what does that mean?" In other words, "What do I do with this success?"

For Todd, after reaching that big milestone, he started becoming more clear about his lack of answers to those questions. In his words, "My practice grew a ton. Now how do I manage it in my ideal life?"

Todd wishes he had thought through the impact of growing a large practice in rural Alaska. He has challenges retaining patients long term due to his location, which has led to volatility month over month in their collections. Remember from this book; the existing patient base is the stability a practice can count on. Todd is unable to truly achieve Shared Practices levels of retention due to his transient patient base.

Todd also has challenges staffing his practice, an issue heightened by practice growth. This has required Todd to be more involved clinically in the day-to-day schedule than he would like.

Hitting his big goal, Todd became clear that his daily life was not his ideal daily life. Todd wants something more passive and wants to spend more time with his kids. Todd is also still getting used to the stress that comes with the financial component of running a larger practice. Some months are extremely profitable; others are less so. They even out over time, but the volatility can test an owner's stomach lining.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

The one thing Todd encourages everyone to do before starting on their own journey for growth is to stop and ask themselves why they are doing it. In Todd's words, "Now that you have these principles, are you doing it for a dollar or to make a difference?"

Throughout this entire book we have been talking about analytics, but we have also been trying to talk about vision and work-life harmony. The ultimate goal of this book is to teach dentists how to be clear on their ideal life, then use a data-driven approach to build a practice that supports their ideal life. The direction of your practice growth must be aligned with who you are and what you want in life. I so appreciate Todd's willingness to open up about this part of his journey:

Here are Todd's words regarding his journey:

The number one thing that has contributed to my success (and passion) for the business of dentistry is Shared Practices. I have been a long-time podcast listener from the early days before I ever owned a practice. Shared Practices got me excited about the business of dentistry and the possibilities of practice ownership. I was able to use my knowledge gained from SP and help from the SP gurus to purchase my practice. I used SP coaching from day 1 to avoid many pitfalls and to work through many issues of early practice ownership. I have continued to use SP analytics based coaching to take my practice from $1.3 mil, 5 ops, employees, to over $3 mil, 10 ops, 20+ employees. I have cut my clinical days and increased my profits. I also continue to benefit from the mastermind community for help and support as well as help through pivotal career decisions. The ROI is there - it's a no-brainer to use Shared Practices to ensure your success and fulfillment as a dental practice owner!
---
# CASE Studies

The big takeaway in this case is the importance of beginning with the end in mind. To wrap up Todd's story, he is moving his practice operations toward being less dependent on him so he can step back and spend more time with his family. He is excited to pivot his professional life to be more in line with his personal life desires.

The other thing Todd mentioned in our phone call that I thought was worth sharing was how hard it is to notice the growth: Todd said, "It's almost hard to notice the change until you look back." I couldn't agree more with that sentiment: This is why it is so important to stop and celebrate the wins!

For me, as a growth-oriented entrepreneur, the most satisfying part of the journey is when I look back and see how far we've come. I hope it is clear from reading this book that we make a little bit of progress each day: Yet, there is a compounding moment of gratification when you realize just how much all those days add up to be. Those gratifying moments are only available if you stop and look back.

# Wrapping Up Transformations

The purpose of going through each of those transformations was to demystify the various stages of dental practice growth and to show you anything is possible.

If you did not believe you could grow your practice into a Mega Group, you can look at how Todd was able to do that despite not being able to retain patients to the Shared Practices level of retention.

Each of these transformations are predictable processes that apply to any dental practice. As you saw with the real case studies, real life always looks a little different: There are general commonalities that we discussed for each transformation in this chapter to guide you down your desired path:

177
---
# DENTALMONEYBALL

# Takeaways

1. Any avatar is possible. Pick the practice you want; and follow the road to get there.
2. Recare compound over time. Retain, Open, Fill is a predictable way to grow your patient base over time.
3. With every practice transformation comes an improved quality of life.
4. Once the Profitable Group level has been reached, it's a lot easier to grow from there. You have a platform to build on.
5. MegaGroup practices are very complex and tailored to the owner's vision.

Now we are ready to discuss our final surprise real-life case study:
---
# CONCLUSION

We've worked through all the case studies, and now the last case study is you. You are a real person with real goals.

Using our framework, I've shown you how to identify where you are in terms of your practice stage. And you've learned a lot about different practice models.

So what is interesting to you? Where do you want to go?

I've shown you the transformations so that you know they are all possible, because the first step to accomplishing anything is believing it's possible. The next step is taking action to get there.

The one action I'd like you to take is to trust our process in some way. You will find our philosophy is like peeling an onion; there is always another layer you can go deeper: Engage with us in whatever way is appropriate for you:

At our website, sharedpractices.com, we detail all the different things we do:

- We offer free resources such as the Shared Practices podcast;
- Free monthly practice management webinars, and other helpful free content;
- We offer in-person 2-day practice management courses where we build on the concepts discussed in this book. In these seminars, you leave with a 300-page manual.
---
# DENTAL MONEYBALL

that has many of the nuts and bolts I was not able to discuss in this book. You can also become a client and join our community of growth-minded dentists. We offer mastermind, coaching, hygiene coaching, marketing, and legal services to dentists. As time goes on, we will likely offer more practice management services for dentists.

You can't rely on luck to be successful, and you can't rely solely on hard work to get you there: You can rely on a proven process that has been done time and time again. It's a code we've cracked and one we understand, and it's repeatable:

Think back to the example of the 3 different practices we walked through in the Patient Retention chapter: The difference between the Shared Practices office proactively retaining 94 percent of patients versus 82 percent of patients is a large difference. That small of a difference in proactive retention leads to 3 times more patients leaving without their next appointment: Point being, small improvements in the right areas make the largest outcomes. If you are the type of person who needs help to get over the edge, we are here for you. There is no point in struggling to achieve these outcomes; we have repeatable ways to hold dental teams accountable to these results.

Whether you walk with us or choose to go alone, take a step every day toward your final goal. One day you will get there. My motivation for writing this book was to inspire dentists to pursue what they really want in life, using their practice as the ultimate vehicle to get them there.

I distinctly remember the first day my practice became a Profitable Group: It was the day I walked into the practice and saw a busy schedule that included 2 productive dentists and 4 busy hygienists. It hit me like a ton of bricks: all the effort I had put into growing the practice had worked.

180
---
# Conclusion

I thought: Oh mygosh. I got here. This is where I wanted to go. This is the place. We finally have the proper number of patients for the number of providers.

Up until that point, I was working at it but never knew when that day would come.

Right after that epiphany, right after seeing how my new approach was paying off, I immediately hired a fourth hygienist because I knew I was onto something: Getting to that point doesn’t happen at once; it happens slowly. But the first time you see it come to life, it's incredibly exciting: You can experience that first breakthrough day - too. And the excitement that comes after it when you have arrived at your desired destination.

Trust our process every day, and that ideal day you want so badly will soon arrive. Your rowboat will arrive at your desired destination full of momentum and ready to move forward. If you are rowing every day toward your goals, it is not a matter of if you’ll get there; it's simply a matter of when.

And that, dentists, is all I have for you: Take whatever is right for you, and move toward the best version of yourself. It is my hope that at some point during this book, you had one or a few lightbulb moments. Let those moments of clarity guide your direction forward. If I have done what I intended to do, you will have had your own analytics epiphany. That is the gift I’d like to pay forward. It was one of the defining moments of my career, and I hope reading this book was a defining moment in your career.

For more information, visit our website SharedPractices.com, where you can learn more about our process, book a free call regarding any of our services, find information about our events, access free resources, or listen to our podcast.

181
---
Made in the USA

Coppell, TX

02 January 2025

43775510R10103